SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 1 of 34
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICE OF   
MEDICINES 
This document provides guidelines for the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) in South Africa.  This guideline is not 
an exclusive approach.  SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality and efficacy 
of a medicine.  SAHPRA may amend this guideline in keeping with the latest knowledge at the time of consideration of data 
accompanying applications for registration of medicines. Scientifically and technically justified alternative approaches SAHPRA is 
committed to ensuring that all medicines gaining market approval will be of the required quality, safety and efficacy standards. 
 
Document History 
Final 
Version
Reason for Amendment
Effective Date
1 
Implementation  
1997 
1 
Chapter 9 (Validation) reformatted 
January 2004 
2 
Adoption of PIC/S GMP Guide of July 2004 
January 2006 
3 
Amendment of Introduction and inclusion of requirements for Quality 
Product Review (1.5), Risk Management (1.6), On-going stability 
programme (6.7), Analytical Method Validation (Annex 15 15.7) and  
Glossary, keeping of Reference and Retention samples (Annex 19), Quality 
Risk Management (Annex 20) 
September 2008 
4 
Amendments to Radiopharmaceuticals (Annex 3), Herbal Medicinal 
Products (Annex 7) 
March 2009 
5 
Consolidation of comments on versions 3 & 4 
November 2010 
6 
 
Adoption of PIC/S Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) 1 
January 2017, PE 009-13   
 
Amendment of Introduction  
 
Deletion of Chapters 1  9, Annexes 1  15 and 17   
 
20, Addendums I and II and Glossary  
December 2017 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 2 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
Inclusion of Section 2 Adoption and Adaptation of PICS GMP Guide, 
Section 3 Regulatory Processes and moving of Annex 16 from version 
5 to Section 4  
7 
 
Additional guidance on the regulatory process for GMP approval 
 
Detailing of recognised authorities for GMP reliance  
 
Specifying the dosage form, product type and activity grouping 
July 2019 
8 
To comply with SAHPRA documents formats 
August 2022 
9 
Alignment with PICS Annex 16 
November 2025 
10 
 
Inclusion of Section 4.1.6 for specification of the minimum years of 
experience required for key personnel per license category in terms 
of Section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines and Related Substances Act 101 
of 1965 
April 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 3 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
Contents 
Document History .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary .............................................................................................................................................................. 4 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.2 Scope .......................................................................................................................................................... 5 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION ...................................................................................................................................... 5 
2.1 ADOPTION AND ADAPTATION OF THE PICS GMP GUIDE .......................................................................... 5 
3. 
REGULATORY PROCESSES .......................................................................................................................... 6 
3.1 Principles .................................................................................................................................................... 6 
3.2 GMP Approval Guidance ............................................................................................................................ 6 
4. 
SOUTH AFRICAN SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO KEY PERSONNEL: .............................................. 7 
4.1 ORGANISATION & PERSONNEL .................................................................................................................. 7 
4.1.1 
PRINCIPLES ............................................................................................................................................ 7 
4.1.2 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF KEY PERSONNEL ................................................................................................. 8 
4.1.3 
LEGAL ASPECTS ................................................................................................................................... 14 
4.1.4 
QUALIFICATIONS ................................................................................................................................. 18 
4.1.5 
TRAINING ............................................................................................................................................ 19 
4.1.6 
EXPERIENCE ......................................................................................................................................... 20 
4.1.7 
HYGIENE .............................................................................................................................................. 29 
5. 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 30 
6. 
VALIDITY ................................................................................................................................................... 30 
7. 
APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................................. 31 
7.1 Appendix 1: Recognized Regulators ......................................................................................................... 31 
7.2 Appendix 2: Dosage group, product type and activity groupings ............................................................ 31 
7.3 Appendix 3: Experience Requirements in terms of Annexure 1 to the License, S22C(1)(b) of the ......... 33 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 4 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term 
Meaning 
GMP  
Good Manufacturing Practice 
PICS 
Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme 
RP 
Responsible Pharmacist 
RPn 
Responsible Person 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 5 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) is described as a set of principles and procedures that, when followed, 
ensure that medicines and related substances are of high quality, safety and efficacy. The South African 
Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) is a affiliated member of the Pharmaceutical Inspection 
Cooperation Scheme (abbreviated as PICS). The PICS aims to develop international standards between 
countries and pharmaceutical inspection authorities and provide harmonised and constructive co-operation 
in the field of GMP. The PICS affiliation is subject to initial and periodic assessment of the participating 
authority to ensure that it has equivalent legislation, regulatory and enforcement procedures and inspection 
capacity.   
1.1 
Purpose 
GMP is a system that ensures   medical products are consistently produced and controlled according to 
quality standards. It is designed to minimise the risks involved in any pharmaceutical production that 
cannot be eliminated through testing the final product. 
The standards set out in this guideline apply to medicines and similar products intended for human use. 
It is recommended, however, that the same attention be given to the manufacture of veterinary products. 
Administrative measures of national health authorities should be directed towards the application of 
these standards in practice, and any new or amended national regulations for good manufacturing 
practice should at least meet their level. These standards also serve as a basis for the elaboration of 
specific rules adapted to the individual needs of manufacturers. 
1.2 
Scope 
GMP covers all aspects of production from the starting materials, premises, equipment, training and 
personal hygiene of staff. Detailed written procedures are essential for each process that could affect the 
quality of the finished product. There must be systems to provide documented proof that correct 
procedures are consistently followed step - by  step in the manufacturing process of a product. 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION  
2.1 
ADOPTION AND ADAPTATION OF THE PICS GMP GUIDE 
Section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines and Related Substances Act No. 101 of 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) specifies 
that manufacturers, importers, exporters, wholesalers and distributors of medicines and related 
substances (including excipients and APIs) must hold a licence.  Regulation 23 of the Act specifies that 
there must be the ability to comply with good manufacturing, wholesaling, or distribution practices as 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 6 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
determined by the Authority if you want to be a licence holder.  This enables the Authority to determine 
manufacturing practices and the relevant code of GMP to be applied by manufacturers.   
As a participating Authority of PICS, SAHPRA requires that manufacturers, importers and exporters of 
medicines and related substances in South Africa meet the standards laid out in the PICS Guide to GMP.  
As such, SAHPRA has adopted the PICS Guide to GMP, and all prospective adaptations as prescribed by 
the PICS. 
or Authorised Person will be equivalent to 
 
3. 
REGULATORY PROCESSES  
3.1 
Principles 
GMP agreements with competent international regulatory authorities support information sharing and 
other desirable objectives for international regulatory collaboration.  These agreements do not permit 
automatic acceptance of the decisions of the other party but may be used to enhance regulatory oversight 
and significantly reduce regulatory burden without diminution of compliance. 
Manufacturers of medicines (including excipients and APIs) supplied in the South African market must 
demonstrate compliance with the relevant code of GMP.  This is usually, but not always, done through an 
on-site inspection and with acceptable documentary GMP evidence.  
It is an offence in South Africa to manufacture, import or export medicines in South Africa without a 
licence and certification in terms of Section 22C of the Medicines and Related Substances Act (Act 101 of 
1965.  
3.2 
GMP Approval Guidance 
GMP approval guidance for sites involved in the manufacture of products can be found below. Also note 
that adherence to these requirements does not guarantee a site will be deemed GMP compliant by 
SAHPRA. SAHPRA reserves the right to request additional documentation, schedule an inspection or reject 
any sites regardless of adherence to the below requirements: 
 
The site has been approved by a recognised regulator (see Appendix 1 below), 
 
The site was approved by the recognised regulator (Appendix 1) within the previous 3 years, and 
 
The dosage form of the product within the application is within the same dosage form grouping 
as the dosage form approved by the recognised regulator (see Appendix 2 below),   
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 7 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
The product type applied for is the same as the product type approved by the recognised regulator 
(see Appendix 2 below), and  
 
The activities applied for by the applicant are the same activities that have been approved by the 
recognised regulator (see Appendix 2 below). 
4. 
SOUTH AFRICAN SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO KEY PERSONNEL: 
4.1 
ORGANISATION AND PERSONNEL 
4.1.1 
PRINCIPLES 
The company must have an organisational chart that has been approved for use.  The organogram should 
clearly indicate the reporting lines and level of responsibility in accordance with the functional 
relationships described in the individual job descriptions of the functionaries referred to.   
The establishment and maintenance of a satisfactory system of quality assurance and the correct 
manufacture and control of medicines relies on people.  For this reason, there should be sufficient 
personnel at all levels with the ability, suitable skills and training, experience and, where necessary, the 
professional or technical qualifications and appropriate managerial skills to the tasks assigned to them.  
Their duties and responsibilities should be clearly explained to them and recorded as job descriptions.  
Proper job descriptions should include the responsibilities and document in detail the policy and 
requirements.  
All personnel should be aware of the principles of GMP that affect them and receive initial and continuing 
relevant training, including hygiene instructions relevant to their needs.  Responsibilities should be 
delegated, and acceptance acknowledged in writing.  Duties may be delegated to designated deputies of 
a satisfactory qualification level.  There should be no gaps or unexplained overlaps in the responsibilities 
of those personnel concerned with application of GMP.  
The way in which the various key responsibilities which can influence product quality are allocated may 
vary with different manufacturers.  These responsibilities should be clearly defined and delegated.  The 
responsibilities placed on individuals should not be so extensive as to present any risk to quality.  Suitably 
qualified people should be designated in writing to take up the duties of key personnel during the absence 
of the latter.  
Key personnel should be provided with adequate supporting staff.  People in responsible positions should 
have sufficient authority to discharge their responsibilities.  In particular, the people responsible for 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 8 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
Quality Assurance functions should be able to carry out their defined functions impartially.  An official 
responsible for production and Quality Assurance should not be the same person and be equal in level of 
authority.  They should not report to each other; both officials should have individual responsibility to 
achieve the requisite quality.  The duties of the official responsible for Quality Assurance function are 
 
4.1.2 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF KEY PERSONNEL 
Key personnel include: 
 
a natural person who resides in South Africa, responsible to SAHPRA for compliance with the 
requirements of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) as amended   
 
a Managing Director, 
 
a person responsible for Production,   
 
a person responsible for Quality Assurance, and   
 
a Responsible Pharmacist that is responsible to: 
o SAHPRA for compliance with the requirements of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 
1965 (Act 101 of 1965), and the 
o Pharmacy Council for compliance with the requirements of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act 53 
of 1974)   
4.1.2.1 Managing Director 
 
The Managing Director of a company entitled to carry out the business of a 
pharmacist must be in line with Regulation 25 of the Pharmacy Act and the 
relevant sections of the Medicines Act 
 
 
Shall undertake the overall administration of the pharmacy business, which 
includes but is not limited to the regulation of pharmacy matters, human 
resources, or matters relating to processes regarding medicines or scheduled 
substances including procedures and record keeping and shall be responsible to 
the Council for any act performed by or on behalf of such company or close 
corporation, including any omission to perform an act required to be performed 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 9 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
by or on behalf of such owner which may involve disciplinary action by the 
Council, unless he or she can satisfy the Council that the responsibility for such 
act rests upon the nominee, responsible pharmacist or a pharmacist other than 
him or herself employed by such company or close corporation; 
 
shall ensure that there is compliance with good pharmacy practice as published 
by the Council in rules; 
 
shall ensure that a responsible pharmacist is appointed for each pharmacy 
wherein or from which the company or close corporation conducts business; 
 
shall be part of the decision-making process affecting the pharmacy business; 
 
shall supervise every pharmacist responsible, appointed by the owner of a 
pharmacy business, if applicable; 
 
shall ensure that the pharmacy owner complies with all the conditions of: 
o ownership of such pharmacy business; 
o registration of the pharmacy; 
 
shall ensure that no person is appointed to perform any act falling outside the 
scope of practice of the category in which such person is registered or which he/ 
she is not authorized to perform in terms of the Act; 
 
shall report in writing any non-compliance with sub-regulations 25(2), 25(3), 25(5) 
or 25(6) to the management of such pharmacy business and furnish Council with 
a copy thereof; and 
 
shall not introduce or carry out any instruction or order from management about 
the pharmacy business of the pharmacy owner which could amount to a 
contravention of legislation applicable to such pharmacy business. 
4.1.2.2 Head of Production 
The Head of Production (HOP), in addition to his responsibilities (Chapter 2) for:  
 
production areas, equipment, operations and records; 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 10 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
the management of production personnel; 
 
the manufacture of products in accordance with the appropriate Master 
Formulation; and for 
 
manufacturing instructions will have other responsibilities bearing on quality, 
which he should share or exercise jointly with the Head of Quality Control.  
4.1.2.3 Head of Quality Control (HQC)   
The Head of Quality Control should have the authority to establish, verify and 
implement all quality control procedures such as authority over quality decisions, 
oversight of testing and results, approval of quality control documentation, laboratory 
management, validation and method control etc 
In some companies the Head of Quality Assurance oversees all the quality assurance 
arrangements and reports to senior management.   
The Head of Quality Control may report to the Head of Quality Assurance and share 
some of the responsibilities with him. The person responsible for Quality Assurance 
should be part of the decision-making process in all matters that affect the quality of 
products including development, laboratory, storage, distribution, vendors and third-
party contractors.  
4.1.2.4 Shared or joint responsibilities of the Head of Production and Head of Quality 
Control (Chapter 2)   
It is important that both direct and shared responsibilities (e.g., validation oversight, 
complaint investigations, product quality review, recall management, and self-
inspection) are understood by those concerned.  
4.1.2.5 The Responsible Pharmacist contemplated in Regulation 25 (3) of the Pharmacy Act 
and the relevant sections of the Medicines Act must:   
 
ensure that he or she continuously supervises the pharmacy in which he or she 
has been appointed   
 
have appropriate qualifications and experience in the services being rendered by 
such pharmacy   
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 11 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
ensure that people being employed in such pharmacy and who provide services 
forming part of the scope of pharmacy practice of a pharmacist are appropriately 
registered with the Pharmacy Council   
 
notify the Pharmacy Council immediately upon receiving knowledge that their 
services as responsible pharmacists have been or will be terminated   
 
take corrective measures in respect of deficiencies with regard to inspection 
reports of the Pharmacy Council or in terms of the Medicines Act; and   
 
in addition to the general responsibilities also   
o ensure that unauthorized persons do not obtain access to medicines or 
scheduled substances or the pharmacy premises outside of normal trading 
hours, 
o establish policies and procedures for the employees of the pharmacy with 
regard to the acts performed and services provided in the pharmacy,   
o ensure the safe and effective storage and keeping of medicine or scheduled 
substances in the pharmacy under his or her direct personal supervision, 
o ensure correct and effective record keeping of the purchase, sale, 
possession, storage, safekeeping, and return of medicines or scheduled 
substances and ensure the required reporting of figures of scheduled 
substance purchases and sales are reported to the International Narcotics 
Control Board (INCB), 
o ensure that all batches manufactured and released for sale, supply or export 
meet the requirements in terms of the marketing authorization, GMP 
guidelines and other legal requirements,  
o ensure that batch release considers storage- and transport conditions of 
bulk- and final packed product, sampling processes- and QC analysis results 
and where relevant, the Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (TSE) 
status of materials used during batch manufacture is compliant with the MA 
terms, 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 12 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
o ensure that all manufacturing and testing processes remain in a validated 
state, 
o ensure that repackaging for parallel imports and distribution purposes is 
approved by SAHPRA, 
o Ensure that audit reports comprehensively address general GMP 
requirements and include accurate descriptions of inspected areas, resulting 
in thorough and actionable documentation ensure that tamper-evident 
safety features are in place to prevent product tampering,  
o the required technical agreements are in place, and 
o self-inspection programme is active and current. 
 
initiate and co-ordinate all recall activities, which should involve the Head of 
Quality Management; 
 
ensure that a letter of authorization to communicate with Council, signed by the 
CEO, be submitted to SAHRPA;   
 
compile a letter of delegation of authority in their absence;   
 
control the manufacturing or distribution of medicines, scheduled substances or 
medical devices in terms of the provisions of the Medicines Act, 1965;   
 
ensure that there is compliance with Good Pharmacy Practice as published by the 
Pharmacy Council;   
 
be part of the decision-making process affecting the pharmacy business;   
 
supervise every pharmacist appointed by the owner of a pharmacy business and 
ensure that the pharmacy owner complies with all the conditions of    
o ownership of such pharmacy business   
o registration of the pharmacy   
 
ensure that no person is appointed to perform any act falling outside the scope 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 13 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
of practice of the category in which such person is registered or which he/she is 
not authorised to perform in terms of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act 53 of 1974);   
 
report in writing any non-compliance with the Pharmacy Act to the management 
of such pharmacy business and furnish Pharmacy Council with a copy thereof;   
 
not introduce or carry out any instruction or order of management with regard to 
the pharmacy business of the pharmacy owner which could amount to a 
contravention of legislation applicable to such pharmacy business; and   
 
be responsible to SAHPRA for compliance with the provisions of the Medicines 
and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) relating to the sale, control of 
the manufacturing and distribution of medicines, scheduled substances or 
medical devices.   
4.1.2.6 A Pharmacist or other legally authorized person is responsible for:   
 
independently checking and signing each dispensed material and its mass or 
volume;   
 
checking and signing the addition of each material to the mix;   
 
checking and signing the identity of the bulk product and printed packaging 
material;   
 
checking and signing that each packaging line or station is clear of previous 
product, packaging components records or materials not required for the planned 
packaging operations, and that equipment is clean and suitable for use before any 
packaging is undertaken.  These checks should be recorded and each packaging 
line opened and closed by a pharmacist, or other legally authorized person or 
quality control.   
 
the release for sale of the finished product.  This release should include the 
completion of a check list which will ensure that all important release criteria have 
been met;   
 
handling scheduled substances in a pharmacy.  Legal requirements regarding the 
documentation and control of scheduled medicines should be adhered to;   
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 14 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
the handling of complaints. A system should be established for handling 
complaints, which should include written procedures indicating the person(s) (e.g. 
pharmacist) responsible for receiving complaints.  The person responsible must 
have appropriate knowledge and experience and the necessary authority to 
decide the action to be taken;   
 
with the handling of adverse events.  A system should be established for handling 
the adverse events, which should include written procedures indicating the 
responsible person(s) (e.g. pharmacist) through whom the reports and activities 
are to be channeled.  The person responsible must have appropriate knowledge 
and experience and the necessary authority to decide the action to be taken.   
4.1.2.7 Consultants 
Consultants advising on the manufacture, processing, packing, or storage of medicines 
shall have sufficient education, suitable skills, training and experience, or any 
combination thereof, to advise on the subject for which they are retained.  Records 
shall be maintained stating the name, address and qualifications of any consultants 
and the type and period of service they provide.  
4.1.3 
LEGAL ASPECTS 
4.1.3.1 Definitions 
4.1.3.1.1 
Pharmacy Act (Act of 1974) & Regulations (Pharmacy Act) 
Quoted for ease of reference  the original source takes precedence. 
 
means guidance and support provided by a 
pharmacist whilst physically present in a pharmacy, and in accordance with rules 
relating to good pharmacy practice published in terms of Section 35A(b) of the Act. 
means guidance and support by a pharmacist to 
pharmacy support personnel in a primary health care clinic or any other facility as 
approved by the council, and in accordance with rules relating to good pharmacy 
practice published in terms of section 35A(b) of the Act. 
means all operations including purchasing of raw material, 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 15 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
processing, production, packaging, releasing, storage, quality assurance, 
importation, exportation of medicine and scheduled substances and related 
control. 
means a pharmacy wherein or from which some or all 
of the services as prescribed in regulation 16 of the Pharmacy Act relating to the 
Practice of Pharmacy are provided and which shall sell medicine only to a wholesale 
pharmacy or a community pharmacy or an institutional pharmacy or to persons 
who are authorized to purchase medicines in terms of the Medicines Act or to an 
organ of State (also refer to the regulations relating to the registration of persons 
and the maintenance of registers  GNR 1160 of 20 Nov. 2000). 
means the natural person appointed and registered as such by a 
company entitled to carry on the business of a pharmacist in terms of the Pharmacy 
Act and who shall be responsible for performing the duties as prescribed in 
Regulation 24 of Pharmacy Act (GNR 1160 of 20 Nov. 2000). 
means a natural person who is a pharmacist and who 
shall be responsible to the Pharmacy Council for complying with all the provisions 
of the Pharmacy Act and other legislation applicable to services which specially 
pertain to the scope of practice of a pharmacist, and the legislation applicable to 
the pharmacy which is under his or her personal supervision and who is registered 
as such in terms of the Pharmacy Act.  
4.1.3.1.2 
Medicines and Related Substances Act (Act 101 of 1965) & Regulations 
(Medicines Act) 
Quoted for ease of reference  the original source takes precedence. 
 means all operations including purchasing of material, processing, 
production, packaging, releasing, storage and shipment of medicines and related 
substances in accordance with quality assurance and related controls. 
means any substance or mixture of substances used or purporting to 
be suitable for use or manufactured or sold for use in  (a) the diagnosis, treatment, 
mitigation, modification, or prevention of disease, abnormal physical, or mental 
state or the symptoms thereof in man; or (b) restoring, correcting, or modifying any 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 16 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
somatic or psychic or organic function in man, and includes any veterinary 
medicine. 
includes a section of the public concerned with manufacturing, dispensing, 
selling, or administering, or the issue of a prescription for medicines or a Scheduled 
substance. 
responsible pharmacist
means a responsible pharmacist as defined in the 
Pharmacy Act, 1974. 
4.1.3.2 Pharmaceutical Companies 
The Pharmacy Act sets certain requirements for pharmaceutical companies, the 
Responsible Pharmacist and pharmacists e.g.: 
 
the company and the Responsible Pharmacist (who must be residing in the 
Republic) must be registered with the Pharmacy Council   
 
pharmaceutical operations must be conducted under the personal supervision of 
a responsible pharmacist whose name is displayed over the main entrance   
 
certain duties and responsibilities must be performed by pharmacists e.g. 
manipulation, preparation or compounding of medicines, manufacturing, and the 
furnishing of advice with regard to medicines, distribution and the sale of 
medicines.   
The Medicines Act further sets requirements for the following activities:   
 
Iabelling of medicines, including package inserts   
 
records and registers for scheduled medicines   
 
sale of medicines only to registered and approved customers   
 
registration of medicines with SAHPRA  
 
adherence to standards   
 
reporting of adverse reactions and technical errors   
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 17 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
advertising of medicines   
 
Narcotic and Psychotropic substances control 
4.1.3.3 Narcotics or Psychotropics 
South Africa is a co-signatory to the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the 1971 
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of the International Narcotics Control Board 
(INCB).  The said Conventions as well as the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 
1965 (Act 101 of 1965) as amended require that annual returns on all sales of narcotic 
and psychotropic substances be submitted to the INCB in Vienna, Austria, before 28 
February each year.  
Manufacturers and wholesalers must keep registers of quantities of specified Schedule 
5 and Schedule 6 substances that were:  
 
held in stock on the 01 January and 31  December of each year;  
 
destroyed, lost or stolen;  
 
acquired by importation of the substance as a raw material or as contained in a 
preparation, local production of the raw material and local purchasing of the raw 
material;  
 
used in the production of any other specified Schedule 5, Schedule 6, Schedule 7 
or any other scheduled substances;  
 
used in the manufacture of preparations (medicines) containing such substances; 
and sold locally or exported.  
These registers must be balanced on the last day of March, June, September and 
December of each year.  
Any person wishing to manufacture specified Schedule 5, Schedule 6, Schedule 7 of 
Schedule 8 substances and/ or medicines containing such substances, must apply for 
a manufacturing permit in terms of section 22A(9)(a)(i) of Act 101 of 1965.  
Manufacturing permits are required for the manufacturing of all Schedule 2 
preparations containing the Schedule 6 substance Cathine ((+) Norpseudoephedrine).   
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 18 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
Importers and exporters of any specified Schedule 5 and Schedule 6 substance and/ or 
medicines must be licensed in terms of section 22C(1)(b) of Act 101 of 1965.  In 
addition, permits are required to import or export such substances and/ or medicines. 
Import or export permits are required for all Schedule 2 preparations containing the 
Schedule 6 substance Cathine ((+)-Norpseudoephedrine).   
Any unusual loss or theft of narcotic or psychotropic substances and/ or medicines 
should immediately be reported to the South African Police Services and to the office 
of the Registrar of Medicines.   
The SAHPRA prescribes the destruction of large quantities of Schedule 2 preparations 
[containing the Schedule 6 substance Cathine ((+)-Norpseudoephedrine)], specified 
only take place after a written authorization by SAHPRA has been issued, specifying 
the quantities indicated in the request.  
4.1.4 
QUALIFICATIONS 
Each person engaged in the manufacture, processing, packing or storage of a medicine shall have the 
education, training and experience or combination thereof, to enable that person to perform the assigned 
functions.   
Training shall be in the particular operations that the employee performs and in general and specific GMP 
and written procedures as they relate to the employee's functions.  Training in GMP shall be conducted 
by qualified individuals on a continuing basis and with sufficient frequency to ensure that employees 
remain familiar with GMP requirements applicable to them.   
Each person responsible for supervising the manufacture, processing, packing or storage of a medicine 
shall have the education, training and experience or combination thereof, to perform assigned functions 
in such a manner as to provide assurance that the medicine has the quality, safety, efficacy and 
bioavailability that it purports or is represented to possess.   
There should be an adequate number of qualified personnel to perform and supervise the manufacture, 
processing, packing or storage of each medicine. 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 19 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
4.1.5 
TRAINING 
All Production, Quality Assurance and Stores personnel and all other personnel (e.g. maintenance, service 
and cleaning staff) whose duties take them into manufacturing areas, or which bear upon manufacturing 
activities, should be trained in the principles of GMP and in the practice (and the relevant theory) of the 
tasks assigned to them.   
Besides the basic training on the theory and practice of GMP, newly recruited personnel should receive 
training appropriate to the duties assigned to them.  Continuing training should also be given and its 
practical effectiveness should be periodically assessed.   
Written training programs should be available, approved by either the head of Production or the head of 
Quality Control, as appropriate.  Training records should be kept.   
Personnel working in areas where contamination is a hazard e.g. clean areas or areas where highly active, 
toxic, infectious or sensitizing materials are handled should be given specific training.   
To assess the effectiveness of training, checks should be carried out to confirm that designated procedures 
are being followed by staff at all levels.  
Visitors or untrained personnel should not be taken into the manufacturing areas.  However, if deemed 
necessary, they should be given information in advance, particularly about personal hygiene and 
prescribed protective clothing which may be required.  They should be closely supervised.   
The concept of Quality Assurance and all the measures capable of improving its understanding and 
implementation should be fully discussed during the training sessions.   
4.1.5.1 Pharmacist Intern (Industry) 
After formal university education, the Pharmacist Intern must undergo a one-year 
internship in Industry, being trained as prescribed by the Pharmacy Act.   
4.1.5.2 Pharmacist's Assistant  
The Pharmacist's Assistant in Industry is required to pass the Pharmacy Council's 
examination which enables the assistant to perform certain functions of a Pharmacist 
as defined by the Pharmacy Act. 
4.1.5.3 Pharmacy Technician - means a natural person registered as such in terms of the Act. 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 20 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
4.1.6 
EXPERIENCE 
In the South African context, the full spectrum of experience requirements described in Annex 16 of the 
PICS Guide to GMP forms part of the legal requirements implemented through this guideline. These 
include the process of batch certification, reliance on GMP assessments conducted by third parties, the 
handling of unexpected deviations, and the release of a batch. The individual authorized to certify and 
release medicinal products, namely the Responsible Pharmacist, is required to meet these experience 
expectations within the licensing framework established under Section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines and 
Related Substances Act and must demonstrate working knowledge of all PIC/S Annexes to GMP Guide 
relevant to the licence category and authorized activities. In addition, the minimum experience and 
competency requirements for other key personnel involved in manufacture, testing, packaging or 
distribution are also defined by licence category to ensure that all personnel supporting the batch release                    
4.1.6.1 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Sterile Pharmaceuticals (Non-Biologicals) 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in aseptic 
manufacturing and terminal sterilization of pharmaceutical products must be 
registered as a practicing pharmacist with the South African Pharmacy Council. Such 
Pharmacist sh
community service experience in 
sterile manufacturing of pharmaceutical products and demonstrate an in-depth 
working knowledge of Annex 1 of the PIC/S GMP Guide (PE 009-17) including but not 
limited to a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
aseptic processing, terminal sterilization, cleanroom behaviors, environmental 
monitoring, media fills, contamination control strategies, batch release systems, 
manufacturing processes, applicable validation and qualification of pharmaceutical 
technology relevant to their organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures sterile 
pharmaceutical sterile manufacturing environment. Such an individual must 
demonstrate knowledge of GMP, and pharmaceutical quality systems. 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures sterile 
pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate qualification in chemistry and/ or 
microbiology. Such an individual should have three 
in a senior or 
supervisory role in a pharmaceutical or other regulated quality control laboratory 
environment involving sterile products. He/ she must demonstrate a sound knowledge 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 21 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, microbiological and analytical quality control, 
sterility assurance principles, and quality control processes applicable to sterile 
pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures sterile 
pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate qualification in pharmacy or 
chemistry or microbiology and not less than five years experience in senior quality 
roles, including oversight of sterile manufacturing operations. The individual must 
demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
contamination control strategies, quality risk management, and regulatory 
expectations applicable to sterile pharmaceutical. 
4.1.6.2 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Non-Sterile Pharmaceuticals 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that manufactures non-
sterile products including oral solid dosage (OSD), liquids, creams and ointments (LCO) 
must be registered as a practicing pharmacist with the South African Pharmacy 
Council. Such 
community service 
experience in manufacturing pharmacy and demonstrate an in-depth working 
knowledge of Annex 9 of the PICS GMP Guide (PE 009-17) as well as demonstrate a 
comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, manufacturing 
processes, environmental monitoring, batch release systems, contamination control 
strategies, manufacturing processes, applicable validation and qualification of 
pharmaceutical technology relevant to their organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures non-sterile 
products including oral solid dosage (OSD), liquids, creams and ointments (LCO) must 
manufacturing environment. Such an individual must demonstrate knowledge of GMP, 
pharmaceutical quality systems. 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures non-
sterile pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate qualification in chemistry 
and/or microbiology
or supervisory role in a pharmaceutical or other regulated quality control laboratory 
environment involving non-sterile products. They must demonstrate a sound 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 22 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, microbiological and analytical 
quality control, and quality control processes applicable to 
non-sterile 
pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures non-
sterile pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate qualification in pharmacy 
or chemistry or microbiology and not less than three 
experience in senior quality 
roles, including oversight of non-sterile manufacturing operations or comparable 
regulated industries. The individual must demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of 
GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination control strategies, quality risk 
management, and regulatory expectations applicable to non-sterile pharmaceutical. 
4.1.6.3 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Biologicals and Vaccines 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of biologicals and/ or vaccines must be registered as a practicing 
pharmacist with the South African Pharmacy Council. Such Pharmacist shall have no 
 in the manufacture of 
biologicals and/ or vaccines including aseptic processing, handling of biological 
systems, and terminal sterilization where applicable. They  must demonstrate an in-
depth working knowledge of Annex 1 and Annex 2B of the PICS GMP Guide (PE 009-
17), a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, aseptic 
processing, biological manufacturing principles including upstream and downstream 
processes, 
terminal 
sterilization 
where 
relevant, 
cleanroom 
behaviours, 
environmental monitoring appropriate to biological manufacturing, media fills 
applicable to aseptic biological operations, contamination control strategies including 
biosafety and bioburden control, manufacturing processes involving biological 
materials, and applicable validation and qualification of biological manufacturing 
technologies relevant to their organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures biologicals 
and/ or vaccines 
pharmaceutical or biological manufacturing environment, such an individual must 
demonstrate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, aseptic and 
biological manufacturing processes including cell culture, fermentation, purification or 
similar biological production methods, and operational control of cleanroom and 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 23 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
biosafety-related production activities. 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures 
biologicals and/ or vaccines must have an appropriate science-based qualification (e.g., 
chemistry and/ or microbiology) and 
experience in a 
pharmaceutical or other regulated quality control laboratory environment involving 
vaccines or biological products, such an individual should have not less three years in 
a senior or supervisory role related to vaccines or biologicals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures 
biologicals or vaccines must have an appropriate qualification, e.g., pharmacy/ 
chemistry/ microbiology/ serology/ molecular biology/ haematology. They must have 
quality oversight 
in the manufacture of vaccines or biologicals. The individual must demonstrate 
comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination 
control strategies including biosafety and viral safety considerations, quality risk 
management principles appropriate for biological products, batch release systems for 
biologicals, and regulatory expectations related to the manufacture of sterile and 
biological pharmaceutical products. 
4.1.6.4 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Medical Gases  
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the filling, 
processing of medical gases must be registered as a practicing pharmacist with the 
post community service experience in the manufacture of pharmaceutical products 
and shall demonstrate an in-depth working knowledge of Annex 6 of the PICS GMP 
Guide (PE-009-17), a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality 
systems, medical gas production and distribution systems, applicable quality controls, 
contamination and cross-contamination prevention, validation and qualification of gas 
supply systems. They must also demonstrate knowledge of the appropriate handling 
and storage of compressed and cryogenic gases. They must have an understanding of 
relevant pharmacopeial requirements, and pharmaceutical technology applicable to 
medical gases and batch release processes applicable to medical gases. 
The Head of Production of a manufacturing pharmacy involved in the manufacture, 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 24 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
filling and processing of medical gases must have an appropriate qualification and/ or 
experience in a pharmaceutical or regulated manufacturing environment. Such an 
supervisory role related to medical gases or comparable regulated manufacturing 
operations. The individual must demonstrate adequate knowledge of GMP, applicable 
pharmaceutical quality systems, and the production processes relevant to medical 
gases. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy involved in the processing 
and filling of medical gases must have an appropriate qualification in pharmacy, 
chemistry or microbiology and/or 
quality management roles related to medical gases or comparable regulated 
manufacturing operations. Such an individual must demonstrate adequate knowledge 
of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, quality risk management, documentation 
control, deviation and change management, and the scope of operations of the 
organization. 
4.1.6.5 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Radiopharmaceuticals   
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals must be registered as a practicing pharmacist 
with the South African Pharmacy Council.  Such Pharmacist shall have not less than five 
community service experience in the manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals 
or pharmaceutical products and/ or shall demonstrate an in-depth working knowledge 
of Annex 3 of the PICS GMP Guide (PE-009-17), a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, 
pharmaceutical quality systems, the handling of radionuclides, applicable quality 
controls, contamination control strategies, manufacturing processes and applicable 
validation and qualification of pharmaceutical technology relevant to their 
organization. 
The Head of Production must have not less 
in the pharmaceutical manufacturing environment or a comparable regulated 
manufacturing environment. Such an individual must demonstrate knowledge of GMP 
and pharmaceutical quality systems. 
The Head of Quality Control of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 25 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals must have an appropriate qualification in 
chemistry or physics and/ or experience in a pharmaceutical, radiopharmaceutical, or 
other regulated quality control environment. Such an individual shall have not less 
radiopharmaceuticals, sterile pharmaceuticals, or comparable regulated products. The 
individual must demonstrate adequate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality 
systems, applicable quality control testing for radiopharmaceuticals, the handling of 
radionuclides for quality control purposes, and release related controls relevant to the 
scope of operations of the organization. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals must have a science-based qualification in 
pharmacy/ chemistry/ microbiology/ physics and/ or 
experience in quality assurance or quality management roles within pharmaceutical 
manufacturing or comparable regulated operations. He/ she must have had an 
exposure to radiopharmaceutical or sterile product manufacturing where applicable. 
The individual must demonstrate adequate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality 
systems, quality risk management, contamination control principles, deviation and 
change management, and batch release oversight applicable to radiopharmaceuticals 
and the scope of operations of the organization. 
4.1.6.6 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Complementary Medicines 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that manufactures 
complementary medicines must be registered as a practicing pharmacist with the 
post community service experience in manufacturing pharmacy and demonstrate a 
comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, manufacturing 
processes, environmental monitoring, batch release systems, contamination control 
strategies, manufacturing processes, applicable validation and qualification of 
pharmaceutical technology relevant to their organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures 
complementary medicines 
in the pharmaceutical manufacturing environment. Such an individual must 
demonstrate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems. 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 26 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures 
complementary medicines must have an appropriate qualification in chemistry and/ 
or microbiology
supervisory role in a pharmaceutical or other regulated quality control laboratory 
environment involving non-sterile and/or complementary products. He/ she must 
demonstrate a sound knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
microbiological and analytical quality control, and quality control processes applicable 
to non-sterile pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that manufactures 
complementary medicines must have an appropriate qualification in pharmacy or 
chemistry or microbiology 
experience in senior quality 
roles. The individual must demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of GMP, 
pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination control strategies, quality risk 
management, and regulatory expectations applicable to complementary medicines. 
4.1.6.7 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Packaging Activities 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in primary 
and/ or secondary packaging of pharmaceutical products must be registered as a 
practicing pharmacist with the South African Pharmacy Council. Such Pharmacist shall 
pharmacy and demonstrate a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical 
quality systems, manufacturing processes, environmental monitoring, batch release 
systems, contamination control strategies, manufacturing processes, applicable 
validation and qualification of pharmaceutical technology relevant to their 
organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in primary 
and/ or secondary packaging of pharmaceutical products must have more than three 
an individual must demonstrate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems. 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in primary 
and/ or secondary packaging of pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate 
qualification in chemistry and/ or microbiology. Such an individual should have three 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 27 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 in a pharmaceutical or other regulated 
quality control laboratory environment involving pharmaceutical products. They must 
demonstrate a sound knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
microbiological and analytical quality control, and quality control processes applicable 
to pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in primary 
and/ or secondary packaging of pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate 
qualification in pharmacy or chemistry or microbiology 
experience in senior quality roles. The individual must demonstrate comprehensive 
knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination control strategies, 
quality risk management, and regulatory expectations applicable to pharmaceuticals. 
4.1.6.8 Testing Activities 
The Responsible Person of a Pharmaceutical Testing Laboratory shall have no less than 
in a senior or supervisory role in a pharmaceutical or other 
regulated quality control laboratory environment involving pharmaceutical products. 
They must demonstrate a sound knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
microbiological and analytical quality control, and quality control processes applicable 
to pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a Pharmaceutical Testing Laboratory must have an 
appropriate qualification in chemistry or microbiology and not less than five 
experience in senior quality roles. The individual must demonstrate comprehensive 
knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination control strategies, 
quality risk management, and regulatory expectations applicable to pharmaceuticals. 
 
4.1.6.9 Manufacturing Pharmacy for Cannabis 
The Responsible Pharmacist of a Manufacturing Pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of the cannabis pharmaceutical products must be registered as a 
practicing pharmacist with the South African Pharmacy Council. Such Pharmacist shall 
pharmacy and demonstrate a comprehensive knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 28 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
quality systems, manufacturing processes, environmental monitoring, batch release 
systems, contamination control strategies, manufacturing processes, applicable 
validation and qualification of pharmaceutical technology relevant to their 
organization. 
The Head of Production of the manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of the cannabis pharmaceutical products must have more than three 
an individual must demonstrate knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems. 
The Head of Quality Control of a manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of the cannabis pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate 
qualification in chemistry and/ or microbiology. Such an individual should have three 
 in a pharmaceutical or other regulated 
quality control laboratory environment involving pharmaceutical products. He/ she 
must demonstrate a sound knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, 
microbiological and analytical quality control, and quality control processes applicable 
to pharmaceuticals. 
The Head of Quality Assurance of a manufacturing pharmacy that is involved in the 
manufacture of the cannabis pharmaceutical products must have an appropriate 
qualification in pharmacy or chemistry or microbiology 
experience in senior quality roles. The individual must demonstrate comprehensive 
knowledge of GMP, pharmaceutical quality systems, contamination control strategies, 
quality risk management, and regulatory expectations applicable to pharmaceuticals. 
4.1.6.10 Holder of Certificate of Registration (Importer or Exporter) 
The Responsible Pharmacist for the organization that acts as a Holder of Certificate of 
Registration must be registered as a practicing pharmacist with the South African 
service experience in the regulatory environment which can include relevant 
cumulative experience in pharmaceutical regulatory affairs, quality assurance, GMP 
compliance, batch release oversight, or manufacturing quality systems, where such 
experience is directly relevant to the importer/ exporter role and demonstrate 
comprehensive knowledge of GMP, and pharmaceutical quality systems. 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 29 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
4.1.7 
HYGIENE 
4.1.7.1 Personal Hygiene 
High standards of personal cleanliness should be observed by all those concerned with 
production processes. The special requirements for Sterile Products are covered in 
Annex 1.   
Personnel should be instructed to use the hand-washing facilities.   
Detailed hygiene programmes should be established and adapted to the different 
needs within the factory.  These should include instructions relating to the health, 
hygiene practices and clothing of personnel.  These instructions should be understood 
and followed in a very strict way by every person whose duties take him into the 
manufacturing and control areas.  They should be promoted by management and 
widely discussed during training sessions.   
Eating, drinking, chewing and smoking, or the storage of food, drink, smoking materials 
and personal medication should not be permitted within manufacturing areas or in any 
other area where they might adversely influence product quality.  No make-up or false 
lashes are permitted in primary areas due to increased risk to product contamination. 
Direct contact should be avoided between the operators' hands and starting materials, 
intermediates and products (other than when they are in closed containers), as well as 
with any part of the equipment that comes into contact with the products.  
4.1.7.2 Area Control 
Requirements regarding personal hygiene and protective clothing apply to all people 
(including visitors, maintenance personnel, senior management and inspectors) 
entering production areas.   
All people entering production areas should wear protective garments appropriate to 
the processes being carried out. The garments should be regularly and frequently 
cleaned and not worn outside the factory premises. Changing Rooms should be 
provided.   
Only personnel authorized by supervisory personnel shall enter those areas of the 
buildings and facilities designated as limited-access areas. 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 30 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
4.1.7.3 Medical Checks 
Medical checks should be performed at pre-employment and at regular intervals 
thereafter.  Steps should be taken to ensure that no person with a disease in a 
communicable form, or with open lesions on the exposed surface of the body, is 
engaged in the manufacture of medicinal products.   
Visual inspection staff should pass an annual eye examination.   
Staff should be required to report infections and skin lesions, and a defined procedure 
should be followed when they are reported.  Supervisory staff should look for the signs 
and symptoms of these conditions.  
5. 
REFERENCES 
The following related documents are referenced: 
5.1 
PICS GMP Guideline  
6. 
VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces previous revision 
(v9). It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when the need arises. 
 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 31 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
7. 
APPENDICES 
7.1 
Appendix 1: Recognized Regulators 
 
PICS Members 
 
WHO 
 
ZAZIBONA 
 
7.2 
Appendix 2: Dosage group, product type and activity groupings 
GMP certificates submitted for reliance must be approved by a recognized regulator for the same dosage 
group that they are applying for. Dosage groupings are:  
 
Oral soluble dosages 
o Tablets  
o Capsules  
o Powders  
 
Liquids, creams and ointments  
o Liquids  
o Creams  
o Ointments 
o Suppositories  
 
Medical gasses 
 
Small volume parenteral 
 
Large volume parenteral 
 
Aerosols  
Applicants must ensure GMP certificates submitted for reliance must be approved by a recognized 
regulator for the same product type that they are applying for. Product types are:  
 
Cytotoxics  
 
Hormones  
 
Penicillin  
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 32 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
 
Biological or Vaccines 
 
Cephalosporins  
 
Gasses  
 
Veterinary  
 
Complementary medicines  
Applicants must ensure GMP certificates submitted for reliance must be approved by a recognized 
regulator for the same activities that they are applying for. Applicants must only select activities that are 
relevant to them, the list of applicable activities are:  
Holder of registration certificate 
 
Export   
 
Import  
 
 Manufacturing  
 
Manufacture of Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API)  
 
Manufacture of Excipients  
 
Manufacture of Finished manufacturing product (FMP)  
 
Packer  
 
Distributor  
 
Laboratory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 33 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
7.3 
Appendix 3: Experience Requirements in terms of Annexure 1 to the License, S22C(1)(b) 
of the Medicines and Related Substances Act 
AUTHORISED MANUFACTURING AND MATERIAL HANDLING ACTIVITIES 
1.  MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES 
RP 
HOP 
HQA 
HQC 
Sterile, Non-biological Manufacture (includes filling, but not cartoning or labelling)
5 
3 
5 
3 
Large volume parenteral products 
Small volume parenteral products 
Other sterile dosage forms: Peritoneal Dialysis solutions, Irrigation Solutions, 
Blood collection and storage solutions 
Non-sterile Manufacture
5 
3 
3 
3 
Tablets 
Capsules 
Liquids 
Semi-solids (Creams & Ointments) 
Suppositories 
Other non-sterile dosage forms: Aerosol and Lozenges 
Biological Manufacture 
5 
3 
3 
3 
Vaccines 
Sera and other immunologicals 
Blood and other blood products 
Other biological products: 
Medical Gas Manufacture 
3 
3 
3 
3 
Radioactive Medicines Manufacture 
5 
3 
3 
3 
Complementary Medicines Manufacture 
5 
3 
3 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  PACKAGING ACTIVITIES 
5 
3 
3 
3 
Packaging of bulk products and labelling 
Re-labelling or redressing 
Cartoning or secondary packaging 
 
RPn/QC
- 
QA 
- 
SAHPGL-INSP-02_v10 
Page 34 of 34
Guidelines for  Good Manufacturing Practice of  Medicines 
13 April 2026
 
 
3.  TESTING ACTIVITIES 
5 
- 
5 
- 
Analytical 
Microbiological 
Sterility  
Stability 
Animal 
Other Testing Activities: Chemical 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  DISTRIBUTION ACTIVITIES 
RP 
 
 
 
Bulk distribution to wholesale pharmacies (Distribution of own products only) 
3 
 
 
 
Fine distribution to retail pharmacies and others (Distribution of own products only)
 
