 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 1 of 18 
 
 
 
 
ROADMAP AND TRANSITIONAL PROCESS FOR THE 
REGULATION OF COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINES 
 
 
This document has been prepared to serve as guidance to stakeholders regarding the regulation pathway of Category D 
medicines (complementary medicines) for which claims of safety, quality and efficacy and which may be called up for 
registration. It represents the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority’s current thinking on the appropriate 
assurance of safety, quality and efficacy of CMs and the intention of the Authority over the described period of time. 
 
 
 
Version 1 – Implementation in accordance with Government Gazette Notice R.870 in 
Government Gazette 37032 of 15 November 2013 
15 November 2013 
Version 2 – Implementation in accordance with Government Gazette Notice R.859 in 
Government Gazette 41064 of 25 August 2017 
September 2019 
Version 2_1 – Guideline format, process update and minor amendments 
June 2020 
Version 2_2 – Updated timelines, inclusion of process flow for new application for SAHPRA 
licences limited to Category D medicines 
March 2021 
Version 2_3 – Process update; Updated timeline, Updated labelling compliance timeline 
(Annex B of Guideline 7.05); Addition of narrative on process flow for new licences. 
December 2021 
 
 
 
BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 2 of 18 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Introduction 
3 
2. Scope of the Document 
3 
3. Guidance for Regulatory Priorities associated with Complementary Medicines 
4 
3.1 Licensing of Manufacturers, Importers, Exporters, and Wholesalers or Distributors 
4 
3.1.1 Information Required 
4 
3.1.2 Issuing of Licences 
4 
3.1.3 Inspections of Licensed Sites 
5 
3.1.4 Specificity of Licences for Category D Medicines 
5 
3.1.5 Renewals and Amendment of Licences 
5 
3.1.6 Licence Fees 
6 
3.2 Licensing Periods 
6 
3.3 Product Compliance 
6 
3.3.1 Labelling 
6 
3.3.2 Rights of sale 
7 
3.3.3  Advertising and Marketing 
8 
3.4 Medicines Registration Process 
8 
4. Summary of legislative control of Complementary medicines 
8 
5. Summary of General Timelines 
9 
6. General advice to consumers 
10 
7. Update History 
10 
ANNEXURE A 
11 
ANNEXURE B 
12 
ANNEXURE C 
14 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 3 of 18 
1. 
Introduction  
On the 15th November 2013 the Minister of Health published amendments to the General Regulations 
made in terms of the Medicines and Related Substance Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) (hereafter referred to 
as “the General Regulations”), which established a category of medicines, Complementary Medicines 
(Category D) and effectively established a regulatory framework for this category. The medicines which 
fall under this definition originate from the six (6) major disciplines recognised by the South African Health 
Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA), namely Aromatherapy, Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Unani Medicine (Unani-Tibb) and Western Herbal Medicine 1, as well as combination 
products identified in the accompanying Guideline for Complementary Medicines (Quality, Safety and 
Efficacy) published in the same year. 
Following further interaction with various stakeholders, the category of Complementary Medicines was 
broadened to establish two sub-categories of Category D (Complementary medicines), reflected in the 
General Regulations published and implemented as per Government Notice 859 in Government Gazette 
41064 on 25 August 2017. This resulted in the inclusion of new sub-categories of Category D, including 
those traditional disciplines that are not indigenous to South Africa (discipline-specific medicines) but also 
the more modern supplement-type of medicines (health supplements).  
The original deadlines for submission of applications for registration prescribed by regulation 48C of the 
General Regulations in 2013 were deleted by the General Regulations in 2017. A new timeline will be 
established by way of the publication of declarations that categories, sub-categories or classes of 
Category D medicines (Complementary Medicines) shall be subject to registration (“call-up notices”) in 
terms of section 14 of the Medicines and Related Substance Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) (hereafter referred 
to as “the Medicines Act”).  
The registration and availability of Category D medicines will consider their quality, safety and efficacy as 
per section 1(2) of the Medicines Act and in line with their relative risk. Discipline-specific medicines are 
considered either as being of HIGH RISK (clinical evidence required in justification of safety and efficacy) 
or LOW RISK (traditional evidence may be submitted in justification of safety and efficacy) based primarily 
on indication but also on composition and dosage form. Health supplements allow only LOW RISK 
indications and substances, in accordance with lists of substances, dosage ranges and indications 
stipulated in the guidelines issued by the SAHPRA. 
This document is intended to provide guidance to all stakeholders on the intended future regulatory 
pathway, including licensing of activities associated with the supply as well as the registration of 
Category D medicines in order to best harmonise activities of the industry and regulator. 
2. 
Scope of the Document  
This document establishes the roadmap and general overview for the regulatory pathway of 
complementary medicines, including licensing in terms of section 22C(1)(b) and submission of applications 
for their registration following the implementation of the General Regulations in 2017 and applies to 
products for human use (discipline-specific medicines and health supplements). 
With respect to licensing of facilities (section 3.1), this Guideline does not apply to any product associated 
with the cultivation or manufacture of Cannabis-related pharmaceutical products containing 
Tetrahydrocannabinol greater than 0,001 percent. Intended licence holders must instead refer to the 
SAHPRA Guideline 2.44 – Cultivation of Cannabis and Manufacture of Cannabis-related pharmaceutical 
products for medicinal and research purposes on www.sahpra.org.za. 
 
1 Anthroposophical, Gemmotherapeutic, Spagyric Substances and Flower Essences are provided for. See Guideline 7.01 - item 1.4.5. 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 4 of 18 
3. 
Guidance for Regulatory Priorities associated with Complementary Medicines 
3.1 
Licensing of Manufacturers, Importers, Exporters, and Wholesalers or Distributors 
In terms of the provisions of section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act, all manufacturers, wholesalers or 
distributors of medicines or Scheduled substances must be licensed, as the case may be, to manufacture, 
import, export, or act as a wholesaler of or distribute medicines, inclusive of Category D medicines.  
A process to license all relevant entities to: i) manufacture, import or export; ii) import or export; or iii) act 
as a wholesaler of or distribute complementary medicines, commenced by way of an electronic 
application made available by the Authority: www.sahpracm.org.za on 17 February 2020.  The electronic 
platform is intended to provide ease of use for all potential licensees and provides an efficient means of 
tracking and processing any licence application by the Authority. All applications will be reviewed for 
appropriate categorisation with any queries relating to the application raised by the Authority, being 
referred to the applicant within 15 working days of receipt of the application by the Authority provided that 
all correct documentation has been supplied and in the correct format. 
This licensing process is intended to be made available at least twelve (12) months prior to any new call-
up notices being published. 
3.1.1 
Information Required 
The information to be provided by an applicant for the licence is stipulated in regulation 23 of the General 
Regulations and includes information specific to the requirements of the various classes of 
complementary medicines. The minimum information required shall be guided by the application 
process which is meant to provide a developmental basis for the achievement of minimum standards. 
Guidance for completion of the relevant application will be integrated into the licence application 
process.  
As part of the application, all complementary medicines sold by the applicant (whether manufactured, 
imported, exported or distributed) are to be listed. The listed medicines will be confirmed against the 
prescribed definitions of complementary medicines and its sub-categories/classes. Confirmed lists will 
be appended to the relevant licence numbers and will be available online for verification of what 
medicines would be allowed for sale, prior to any relevant call-up notice deadline expiring.  
In the case of the wholesale or distribution of products for third parties only, licence applicants may list 
those companies with which the wholesaler or distributor has technical agreements, or may provide lists 
of products as stated above. 
Any medicine that has not been submitted for registration by any relevant prescribed deadline 
associated with a call-up notice issued in terms of section 14 of the Medicines Act will be removed from 
the relevant licence and will be indicated as being non-compliant. 
3.1.2 
Issuing of Licences 
Licences will be issued to successful applicants based on the SAHPRA’s acceptance of the applicant’s 
attestation of compliance with minimum requirements at the time of application and the payment of the 
required licence application, and desktop evaluation fees. The nature of the licensing process is 
developmental and compliance with minimum standards will allow the successful licensee time and 
space to develop compliance in the field prior to the renewal application. Following a successful 
application for a licence, annual licence retention fees are also payable. 
Applicants will be notified of the result of the evaluation of their application by e-mail and licences may 
then be collected from the offices of the SAHPRA as indicated by such communication. No electronic 
versions of licences will be made available to applicants.  
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 5 of 18 
All licences issued will be valid for a period of five (5) years, during which the holder of the licence must 
be inspected for verification of the attestation of compliance with minimum requirements included with 
the application received and/or accepted by the Authority, at least once. Attestation verification failure 
may result in the suspension or withdrawal of the licence. Licences may be renewed in line with the 
prescripts of the Medicines Act.  
3.1.3 
Inspections of Licensed Sites 
Authority inspections of sites will be conducted for verification of compliance with the minimum 
requirements as attested. Inspections of local sites will take place at least once every five years. The 
Authority may rely upon relevant/appropriate GMP inspection reports by PIC/S members for the issuing 
of the licence but will consider conducting individual inspections as merited by the risk or other reasons 
associated with products manufactured or managed by any international site. The licensee is 
responsible for the payment of any fees to the SAHPRA that may be associated with the verification 
inspection. The SAHPRA may, at its discretion, elect to undertake an inspection of any premises prior 
to the issuing of any licence. 
3.1.4 
Specificity of Licences for Category D Medicines 
Licences issued by way of attestation shall be specific to Category D medicines only. The normal 
licensing procedure applies to the manufacture, import, export or wholesale or distribution of any other 
medicines.  
Existing licence holders need not re-apply using this process for current licences linked to other 
Categories of medicine as well as Category D medicines, that do not require any amendment or 
alteration.  
3.1.5 
Renewals and Amendment of Licences 
An electronic form is available for the renewal or amendment of any existing licence pertaining only to 
Category D medicines (Licence Application Type DA01). The prescribed fees for renewal or amendment 
are payable. 
Any application for renewal of a licence will require information as prescribed in regulation 24, read 
together with regulation 23 of the General Regulations. 
An application for an amendment to a licence must be submitted when any of the following changes 
take place: 
(a) Name of the licence holder; 
(b) responsible pharmacist; 
(c) responsible person; 
(d) site address; 
(e) activities provided for by the licence; or 
(f) 
the medicines or Scheduled substances to be manufactured, imported, exported or distributed 
and sold. 
Any existing licences which pertain to or include Categories of medicines other than Category D and 
which require amendment of their existing product list by adding/removing Category D medicines only, 
may apply on the SAHPRA CM website for a product list amendment by use of the dedicated link 
provided (Licence Application Type DA02). Fees for desktop reviews, as prescribed, relating to these 
products lists (as a primary overview of compliance with quality, safety and efficacy) may be applicable 
at the point of application and are indicated in the application. Any subsequent change to appended 
product lists will thereafter be considered as an amendment (Licence Application Type DA01). 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 6 of 18 
3.1.6 
Licence Fees 
Applications for licences submitted to the regulator (either the Medicines Control Council or the South 
African Health Products Regulatory Authority) prior to 17 February 2020, and which pertain only to 
Category D medicines and have not yet finalised, may be transferred to the electronic application, 
provided that: 
• 
no service has been rendered on the application; 
• 
the fee prescribed at the time of application has been paid; and  
• 
reference for such payment is provided as part of the electronic application.  
If no fee has yet been paid, the application must be re-submitted as a new licence application. 
New licence applications are subject to payment of the licence fee as prescribed at the time of 
application.  
3.2 
Licensing Periods 
Only holders of a valid licence issued in terms of section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act shall be permitted 
to manufacture, import, export or act as a wholesaler or distribute medicines or Scheduled substances.  
A transitional priority licensing period from 17 February 2020 to 28 February 2022 (see item 5) is 
provided for licence applications of existing Category D medicine manufacturers, importers, exporters, 
wholesalers or distributors prior to the publication of new call-up notices issued in terms of section 14 of 
the Medicines Act. 
In compliance with section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act, the manufacture, import, export, wholesale or 
distribution of medicines or Scheduled substances may only take place once licensed.  
After the priority licensing period and publication of call-up notices associated with Category D, any new 
manufacturers, importers, exporters, or wholesalers or distributors must hold a licence prior to 
manufacturing, importing, exporting, wholesaling or distributing any Category D (complementary) 
medicines or have submitted a Category D licensing application on or before 28 February 2022, pending 
its finalisation. 
The online licensing application process will continue to be available after the priority licensing period for 
all new, amendment and renewal applications specific to Category D medicines. 
From 01 March 2022 to 28 February 2023 new applicants may continue to submit licence applications 
to SAHPRA with either a copy of NDoH premises licence or proof of application to NDoH without 
confirmation of compliance with GPP for their NDOH/SAPC applications provided that an undertaking is 
made to supply these when received. From 01 March 2023 new applicants must submit outcomes of 
GPP desktop reviews as part of the SAHPRA Category D licensing applications. 
3.3 
Product Compliance 
3.3.1 
Labelling 
All medicines identifiable as Category D medicines in terms of the Medicines Act and General 
Regulations must be compliant with regulations 10 (labelling of medicines intended for human use), 
11 (professional information for medicines for human use) and 12 (patient information leaflet).  
In terms of the General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines Act: 
• 
The immediate container of any medicine must be labelled in compliance with regulation 10;  
• 
All medicines must be accompanied by Professional Information (regulation 11) which must at least 
be in English and may be accessed electronically provided that the manner in which the professional 
information may be accessed is stated on the patient information leaflet as contemplated in 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 7 of 18 
regulation 12(2)(p). If the Professional Information is not available electronically, then it must be 
supplied in hard copy or as an integral part of the package with the supply of the medicine; 
• 
All medicines are required to be supplied with Patient Information Leaflets (regulation 12) that are 
in English and at least one other official language;  
• 
All active ingredients for complementary medicines should be named or referenced on the label, PI 
or PIL in accordance with Annex B of Guideline 7.05 – Guideline for Complementary Medicines – 
Registration Application ZA-CTD – Quality. Medicines available for sale prior to the date of 
publication of this notice are expected to comply with Annex B of Guideline 7.05 by 28 February 
2023. All new applications for registration must be submitted in compliance with this requirement; 
• 
All unregistered complementary medicines must state the disclaimer on all labelling, exactly as 
prescribed by the General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines Act: “This unregistered 
medicine has not been evaluated by the SAHPRA for its quality, safety or intended use.” Only 
once registered may this disclaimer be removed; and 
• 
All complementary medicines must be identified as such, the relevant discipline must be clearly 
stated, and all general or specific regulatory requirements adhered to relevant to the specific 
product. 
3.3.2 
Rights of sale 
All Category D medicines (complementary medicines), as defined, will be permitted continued rights of 
sale, provided that: 
• 
An application is submitted for their registration by the prescribed deadlines of the applicable call-
up notice; 
• 
they are manufactured, imported, exported, wholesaled or distributed by a holder of or applicant for 
a relevant licence contemplated in section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act at the end of the timeframe 
specified herein;  
• 
they are specifically compliant with the requirements of section 20 and regulations 10, 11, 12 and 
42 as prescribed, and are compliant with any other relevant provisions of the Medicines Act and its 
regulations; and 
• 
they are indicated based on LOW RISK, which includes: 
i.  
General health enhancement without any reference to specific diseases;  
ii.  
Health maintenance; or  
iii. 
Relief of minor symptoms (not related to a disease or disorder). 
Complementary medicines on sale indicated for use deemed to be of HIGH RISK without amendment 
of their indication as above may be called up individually for registration by the SAHPRA. HIGH RISK 
indications include: 
i. 
Treats/cures/manages any disease/disorder; 
ii. 
Prevention of any disease or disorder; 
iii. 
Reduction of risk of a disease/disorder; 
iv. 
Aids/assists in the management of a named disease/disorder or sign/symptom of a named 
disease; 
v. 
Relief of symptoms of a named disease or disorder; or 
vi. 
Treatment of proven vitamin or mineral deficiency diseases. 
Unregistered complementary medicines making use of the terms “Clinically proven” or any similar 
expression (as per Annexure A) shall also be considered to be HIGH RISK and may be subject to 
individual call-up in terms of section 14(2) of the Medicines Act. 
Examples of low-risk indications are provided in Annexure B.  
Any call-up notice issued for individual products on the basis of HIGH RISK classification may be 
associated with the immediate cessation of its sale pending registration of the medicine by the SAHPRA 
in terms of section 14(1) of the Medicines Act. 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 8 of 18 
3.3.3 
Advertising and Marketing 
Medicines may be advertised, taking into account section 20 of the Medicines Act and regulation 42 of 
the General Regulations. Unregistered complementary medicines should consider LOW RISK 
advertising while bearing in mind the rights of members of the public to receive information that is 
transparent, fair, honest, accurate, truthful and empowering.  
3.4 
Medicines Registration Process 
All applications for registration that have already been submitted will continue to be processed and will 
be finalised as soon as possible. For those applicants with products not associated with valid licences 
this may occur only once the relevant licence in terms of section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act has been 
issued.  
The Authority recognises that applications already submitted up until June 2020 may have undergone 
fundamental changes due to a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, updated quality data, 
amended clinical evidence or updated indications. As such, the SAHPRA has provided a process by 
which applicants may, at their choosing, request that such applications be temporarily “uplifted”, 
effectively suspending the relevant review, for such amendment and may be resubmitted in substitution 
of the previous application without prejudice to the application review. This process will take into account 
the existing progress made on the application and the reasons for upliftment. The SAHPRA has provided 
a separate detailed communication on this option (see SAHPRA Communication to Stakeholders 
REQUESTS: Existing Category D (Complementary Medicines) Registration Applications on 07 October 
2021).  
In future, the Authority will provide online mechanisms for the submission of applications for registration 
of Complementary Medicines, which will continue to make use of the CTD format but will provide for 
significant guidance specific to the requirements of Complementary Medicines and their risk profile. This 
mechanism of application for registration will be prioritised for LOW RISK applications that consist of 
single substances and will be progressively expanded to multiple substance formulations, combination 
products and medicines of HIGH RISK. 
All applications for registration of a medicine, where an electronic mechanism is not provided, must 
comply with the current requirements for such application. 
4. 
Summary of legislative control of Complementary medicines  
In terms of the legislative provisions aimed at the regulation of complementary medicines, the following 
regulatory requirements should be adhered to:  
(i) 
Licensing of Manufacturers, Importers, Exporters and Wholesalers:  
In terms of the provisions of section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act, all manufacturers, importers, 
exported and wholesalers or distributors of complementary medicines must be licensed.  
(ii) 
Labelling of Complementary medicines  
In terms of the provisions of regulations 10, 11 and 12 of the General Regulations, all medicines 
falling in Category D must comply with the labelling requirements in so far as the product label, the 
Professional Information and the Patient Information Leaflet are concerned. Active ingredients must 
be named according to Annex B of Guideline 7.05 – Guideline for Complementary Medicines – 
Registration Application ZA-CTD – Quality. 
(iii) Advertising and Marketing of Complementary Medicines 
 
Section 20 of the Medicines Act and regulation 42 of the General Regulations. 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 9 of 18 
(iv) Submission of applications of applicable medicines for registration as complementary medicines by 
deadlines prescribed by relevant call-up notices issued in terms of section 14 of the Medicines Act.  
(iv) All other requirements in terms of the guidance provided herein as well as the Medicines Act, 
generally or specifically applicable to complementary medicines that would permit continued rights of 
sale. Offences and penalties as prescribed by the Medicines Act and the General Regulations apply 
equally in cases related to Category D medicines. 
 
5. 
Summary of General Timelines 
 
 
 
 
Feb 2020 -
Dec 2021
•Finalisation of all outstanding "Health Supplement Annexures".
•Updating, amendment and publication of existing Guidelines for Registration for 
Complementary Medicines.
Feb 2020 -
- Feb 2022
•A priority period that provides time for current suppliers to apply for licences to manufacture, 
import, export or wholesale or distribute complementary medicines. SAHPRA CM portal 
applications available from February 2020.
> July 2021
•Existing applications for medicine registrations which are pending finalisation of licensing 
status will be finalised once licences are issued.
•Publication of call-up notices (in terms of section 14 of the Medicines Act) for Category D 
medicines. Call-up notices staged for Category D medicines over a period ranging from 6 
months to 72 months.
•Piloting of online application processes for registration of low risk Category D medicines.
01 Mar 
2022
•Manufacture, import, export or wholesale or distribution of medicines or Scheduled substances 
may only take place once licensed in accordance with section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines Act 
or a licence application has been submitted prior to this date (01 March 2022).
01 Mar 
2023
•Compliance of labelling (product label, PI and PIL) of active ingredients with Annex B of 
Guideline 7.05 (01 March 2023). Note: Applications for registration of a Category D medicine 
or licence associated with a Category D medicine to be compliant with this requirement at the 
point of submission. 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 10 of 18 
6. 
General advice to consumers  
Consumers must remember that all complementary medicines are medicines. As with any other medicine 
they should be used with care. When intending to use a complementary medicine, make sure it is the 
correct product for you by seeking professional advice. Consumers must remember that “natural” does not 
necessarily mean safe. Many plants and other natural compounds can be poisonous to humans. Many 
pharmaceutical medicines have been developed from plants because of the powerful compounds they 
contain. The quality, safety and efficacy of complementary medicines in South Africa cannot be 
ascertained unless they have been evaluated and registered by the SAHPRA.  
Complementary medicines can interact with other medicines. This could result in other medicines having 
reduced or enhanced effects, including side-effects. When consulting your relevant health care providers 
about your health always tell them about any complementary medicines you are taking. If you are pregnant 
or breastfeeding your baby, please consult your relevant health care provider for advice before taking these 
medicines. As with all medicines, keep complementary medicines out of the sight and reach of children.  
Adverse reactions can occur as a result of taking complementary medicines as for any other form of 
medicine. Consumers and prescribers are encouraged to notify the Authority of any adverse event 
(including therapeutic ineffectiveness) that may be experienced, by using the SAHPRA Adverse Drug 
Reactions and Quality Problem Reporting Form 
Other than reports of adverse events, consumers are able to report or lodge anonymous complaints of 
non-compliance against any complementary medicine through a dedicated website: www.sahpracm.org.za 
or consumers are welcome to report complaints of non-compliance with the SAHPRA directly. 
7. 
Update History 
Date 
Reason for update 
Version & publication 
Nov 2013 
Publication for implementation 
v1 November 2013 
Sep 2019 
Amended publication in accordance with amended 
regulation. 
v2 September 2019 
Jun 2020 
SAHPRA Branding 
Amendments: 
Section 2:  
CBD products and licensing  
Sections 3.1, 3.1.5, 3.2, 3.3.1, 5: Timeframes 
Section 3.1:  
Hyperlink correction  
Section 3.1.3: 
Discretionary inspection guidance 
Section 3.1.5:  
Clarification of fees 
Section 3.3.2:  
Clarification of high risk bullet iv (see 
also Guideline 7.01 amendment) 
Section 3.3.2:  
Introduction to Annexure B 
Section 3.4:  
Reference to upliftment of medicine 
registration applications 
Section 6: 
Pregnant / breastfeeding reference 
Annexure B:  
Examples of low risk indications 
v2_1 June 2020 
Mar 2021 
Sections 3.2, 5: 
Timeframes 
Annexure C: 
Process flow for new application for 
licences limited to complementary medicines  
v2_2 March 2021 
Dec 2021 
General amendments for process update. 
Sections 3.2, 3.3.1, 5: 
 
Timeframe adjustments with guidance. 
 
Amended 
timeframes 
for 
labelling 
requirements in terms of Annex B of 
Guideline 7.05. 
Annexure C:  
Licensing process narrative added. 
v2_3 December 2021 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 11 of 18 
ANNEXURE A 
GUIDANCE ON THE USE OF PARTICULAR EXPRESSIONS IN  
ADVERTISING OF UNREGISTERED MEDICINES 
It has come to the attention of the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) that various 
companies selling unregistered Complementary Medicines on the South African market, for which quality, safety 
and efficacy have not yet been evaluated or verified, may be inappropriately making use of advertising or 
marketing strategies which include use of the words “clinically proven” or similar descriptions including, but not 
limited to: “clinically”, “expertly” or “scientifically”, “formulated”, “developed” or “tested” . 
The SAHPRA has resolved and hereby advises that: 
1. 
Any clinical or other evidence related to unregistered medicines purported to be in substantiation of any 
claim about the quality, safety or efficacy of a medicine must be evaluated by the SAHPRA and such claims 
may only be confirmed by its registration. This is in order to ensure that the claim is valid in terms of the 
evidence relied upon and reflects the relative weight of all available evidence related to the medicine.  
2. 
As there has not yet been any scientific evidence evaluated and approved by the SAHPRA to support the 
use of the words “clinically proven” or similar expression (as indicated above), the use of such expression 
may be potentially misleading and constitutes a risk to the public. Such expression may also prove to be 
a contravention of section 20(1), paragraphs (a) and (b) of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 
1965 (Act 101 of 1965) (hereafter referred to as “the Medicines Act”). 
3. 
The SAHPRA considers the use of the words “clinically proven” or other similar claims that may suggest 
the product to be of substantiated or accepted clinical efficacy without specific approval from the SAHPRA 
to potentially be a contravention of regulation 42(4) of the General Regulations made in terms of the 
Medicines Act. 
The SAHPRA hereby notifies all stakeholders that a contravention of section 20(1) of the Medicines Act or 
regulation 42(4) of the General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines Act may constitute an offence in 
terms of the Medicines Act or General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines Act, respectively. 
The SAHPRA therefore strongly recommends to all stakeholders to be mindful of the protection of public health 
and all relevant legislation which may impact upon such claims described herein and to refrain from the use of 
such terms which may prove misleading to consumers. It is recommended that all processes relevant to the 
registration of medicines and the control thereof are considered in the best interest of all members of the public. 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 12 of 18 
ANNEXURE B 
EXAMPLES OF LOW-RISK INDICATIONS 
The following examples of indications are guides as to how various low-risk indications may be phrased in 
compliance with guidance provided by SAHPRA in Guidelines 7.01 and 7.04. 
 
System/Type 
Indication 
GENERAL 
Helps maintain /support energy production in body cells 
GENERAL 
Helps maintain /support cell membrane structure 
GENERAL 
Helps maintain /support cell structure 
GENERAL 
Helps maintain /support body cell uptake of (state vitamin/mineral/nutrient) 
GENERAL 
Helps enhance/promote collagen formation 
GENERAL 
Maintain/support collagen formation 
EAR 
Maintain/support ear health 
EAR 
Maintain/support healthy ear function 
EAR 
Maintain/support healthy hearing 
EYE 
Helps maintain/support healthy eye development 
EYE 
Maintain/support healthy eye function 
EYE 
Maintain/support eye health 
JOINT 
Helps enhance/promote joint health 
JOINTS 
Maintain/support joint health 
JOINTS 
Maintain/support joint mobility/flexibility 
NAILS 
Maintain/support nail health 
MOUTH  
Maintain/support oral health 
BONE  
Helps enhance/promote bone health 
BONE  
Maintain/support bone health 
NUTRITION 
Enhance/improve/promote/increase nutrient uptake 
NUTRITION 
Enhance the assimilation/transportation of nutrients 
GIT  
Decrease/reduce/relieve abdominal feeling of fullness 
GIT  
Decrease/reduce/relieve abdominal pain/discomfort 
GIT  
Maintain/support stomach function 
GIT  
Helps enhance/promote stomach health 
GIT  
Maintain/support stomach health 
NERVOUS 
Maintain/support brain health 
NERVOUS 
Nourish the brain 
NERVOUS 
Brain tonic/Enhance brain health 
NERVOUS 
Maintain /support nerve cell health 
NERVOUS 
Maintain/support refreshing sleep 
NERVOUS 
Decrease/reduce/relieve sleeplessness 
FEMALE 
Maintain/support female reproductive system health 
IMMUNE 
Helps enhance/improve/promote immune system function 
IMMUNE 
Maintain/support immune system health 
MUSCLE 
Maintain/support muscle health 
MUSCLE 
Maintain/support healthy muscle contraction function 
MUSCLE 
Helps enhance/promote healthy muscle function 
MUSCLE 
Maintain/support muscle function 
NUTRITION 
Maintain/support (state vitamin/mineral) within normal range 
NUTRITION 
Helps prevent dietary (state vitamin/mineral/nutrient) deficiency 
RESPIRATORY 
Helps enhance/improve nose breathing 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 13 of 18 
System/Type 
Indication 
RESPIRATORY 
Maintain/support lung health 
SKIN 
Helps enhance/promote skin health 
SKIN 
Maintain/support skin health 
SKIN 
Maintain/support skin elasticity 
SKIN 
Maintain/support healthy skin flora 
SKIN 
Helps enhance/improve skin internal structure 
URINARY 
Maintain/support urinary tract health 
URINARY 
Maintain/support urinary tract function 
WEIGHT / 
SLIMMING 
Prior to evaluation and registration, preparations indicated for slimming will be regarded as 
being of low risk with the following combination of indications/labelling: 
 
1. Low-risk indication: 
May assist with weight loss when used with increased physical activity and an energy-
reduced diet in healthy individuals. 
 
2. Time limit of use recommended: 
Do not use continuously for more than two (2) months without consulting your relevant 
health care provider. 
 
3. As a boxed warning: 
This product is not intended to prevent or treat obesity. 
 
 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 14 of 18 
ANNEXURE C 
LICENSING OF MANUFACTURERS, WHOLESALERS, DISTRIBUTORS, IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
OF CATEGORY D (COMPLEMENTARY) MEDICINES IN TERMS OF THE  
PHARMACY ACT AND THE MEDICINES ACT 
“Pharmacy Act” refers to the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act 53 of 1974) 
“Medicines Act” refers to the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) 
Effective 17 February 2020, SAHPRA provided for a means of electronic application for licences related to:  
i) 
the manufacture, import or export;  
ii) 
the import or export; or  
iii) 
acting as a wholesaler or distribution, 
of Category D medicines.  
The application portal is available at www.sahpracm.org.za and includes new applications, renewal applications 
as well as applications for amendments to existing licences. With respect to the application for any of the licences 
to be issued in terms of the Medicines Act, information to be submitted includes that which is stipulated in 
regulation 23 of the General Regulations as well as information specific to the requirements of the various classes 
of complementary medicines (Category D).  
As prescribed, licences issued will be valid for a period of five (5) years during which the holder of the licence 
must be inspected for verification of the attestation of compliance with minimum requirements included with the 
application submitted to the Authority. This inspection is required prior to the renewal of any licence issued and 
will be based on the submission of the application as attested to by the Responsible Pharmacist. While a licence 
may be issued on the basis of attestation, a Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Certificate would only be issued 
to applicants following a successful GMP inspection and a positive recommendation from such inspection.  
In design of the licensing process, SAHPRA took note that new applicants for SAHPRA licences must first be in 
the possession of pharmacy premises licences, responsible pharmacist certificates and recording of the 
pharmacy owner. The SAHPRA further noted that both the National Department of Health (NDOH) and South 
African Pharmacy Council (SAPC) rely upon the outcomes of the SAHPRA licensing process before any of these 
applications are finalised. A key challenge to the licensing process in general, was therefore the different 
processes outlined by all three entities (SAHPRA, NDOH and SAPC) and the lack of coordinated and streamlined 
processes between these entities in outlining the steps to be taken when licensing the applicants.  
The SAHPRA, having noted and acknowledged the challenge mentioned above and in an effort to assist in 
coordinating the various steps required by potential applicants, consulted the SAPC and NDOH and all entities 
have subsequently developed a draft process flow (Figure 1) that will guide the process for new applications for 
licences limited to Complementary Medicines. This process considers the nature of the application type related 
to Category D medicines, and further provides for the establishment of clear points of communication between 
NDOH, SAHPRA and SAPC which will assist with the efficient finalisation of applications. 
An explanation of the flow chart (Figure 1) tracking the process of a successful application for new licences 
limited to Category D medicines (complementary medicines), is provided on the next page. 
 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 15 of 18 
START 1: 
1. The process of licensing should be initiated by an applicant applying for a Pharmacy Premises Licence to 
the National Department of Health (NDOH). This may be submitted via the South African Pharmacy Council 
(SAPC) website. a, b, c 
2. The NDOH reviews and verifies the completeness of the application.  
3. The application is forwarded for further review to the relevant NDOH committees and SAPC. 
4. The NDOH committees will provide a recommendation concerning their review.  
5. The SAPC will undertake a desktop review of Good Pharmacy Practice (GPP) and may issue a 
recommendation of apparent GPP compliance based on the desktop review undertaken to the applicant and 
will notify the NDOH of such.  
6. The applicant, in possession of the proof of the NDOH application made in step 1 (such as a screenshot of 
the application case number confirmation) as well as the confirmation of compliance with GPP from SAPC 
may proceed to START 2 and utilise these documents for the initiation of an application for the relevant 
Category D licence. 
NOTE: Prior to 01 March 2023 applicants may submit licence applications to SAHPRA with either a copy of 
the NDoH premises licence or proof of application to NDoH without confirmation of compliance with GPP for 
their NDOH/SAPC applications provided that an undertaking is made to supply these when received. Their 
supply may be during or after the SAHPRA application review process.   
START 2: 
7. An applicant may, once the documents in step 6 are available, apply to the South African Health Products 
Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) for the appropriate Category D medicine licence via the online SAHPRA 
CM complementary medicines portal available at www.sahpracm.org.za. An applicant must first be 
registered as a SAHPRA CM website user and then log in to access the applications by navigating to 
“Applications” – “Licensing” – “APPLY” – “1. New Applications” which provide options for new licences 
including: 
• 
Type DL01 - Licence to manufacture, import or export Complementary Medicines (Category D) 
[manufacturers only] 
• 
Type DL02 - Licence to import or export Complementary Medicines (Category D) [holders of certificate 
of registration] 
• 
Type DL03 - Licence to act as a wholesaler of or distribute Complementary Medicines (Category D) 
[wholesalers or distributors] 
Required information is stated in the preamble of every application to which applicants must refer. 
Documents necessary for new applications are listed below d. 
8. SAHPRA will undertake a desktop review of the application submitted in step 7 concerning apparent 
compliance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), Good Distribution Practices (GDP) or Good 
Wholesaling Practices (GWP), as may be applicable, based on the attestation and documents provided. 
SAHPRA will also verify that the list of products supplied in the section 3D product list includes only bona 
fide Category D medicines. e 
9. Following successful review of the application, including review of any replies from the applicant, SAHPRA 
may then recommend the issuing of a licence in terms of section 22C(1)(b) of the Medicines and Related 
Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) to the applicant who, in turn, may provide this to the NDOH. f 
10. SAHPRA notifies the NDOH of the issuing of the section 22C(1)(b) licence specific to Category D medicines 
to the applicant.  
11. The NDOH may, following satisfaction of all application criteria, issue a premises licence to the applicant. 
12. The applicant may proceed to record the NDOH licence with the SAPC online in the manner and timeframe 
prescribed. The SAPC issues the certificate of recording for the pharmacy and pharmacy owner, and a 
certificate of registration for the responsible pharmacist. g, h 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 16 of 18 
13. Within five (5) years from the date of issue, the holder of the licence must be inspected by SAHPRA against 
the applicable standards. In the case of GPP certificates issued without an inspection by the SAPC (desktop 
review only) then a joint inspection by SAHPRA and SAPC must take place. i 
14. The NDOH may be notified of the SAPC inspection outcome. 
15. Following a successful SAHPRA inspection, an application for the renewal of the Category D licence issued 
in terms of section 22C(1)(b) may take place including the outcomes of steps 9, 11, 12, 13.  
Notes:  
a. For guidance on the process and requirements of this application, applicants may refer to the: 
• SAPC website www.sapc.za.org, navigate to “Registered Organisations” and “Licensing and Recording”. 
This includes a user Manual for applicants wishing to apply for a new pharmacy licence. 
• NDOH application form (“Application for Pharmacy Premises licence in terms of Section 22 of the 
Pharmacy Act 53 of 1974”) for guidance on the requirements. 
b. The appointment of a Responsible Pharmacist is required for submission of an application for a pharmacy 
premises licence.  
c. Applications for Category D medicines with SAHPRA run independently from the pharmacy licensing 
process with the NDOH and the SAPC. 
d. Documents required for a new licence application include: 
1 SAPC certificate of recording of the pharmacy or proof of submission of the application to the SAPC 
2  Letter of authorisation of the responsible pharmacist to communicate with SAHPRA 
3  Latest CV of the Responsible Pharmacist 
4  Copy of proof of SAPC registration of the Responsible Pharmacist (RP)  
5  Letter of authorisation of the responsible person to communicate with SAHPRA ( if not the RP)  
6  CV of the responsible person 
7  Copy of NDoH premises licence or proof of application to NDoH 
Copy SAPC certificate of recording of the pharmacy for the site 
8 Copy of SAPC certificate of recording of the pharmacy owner for the site 
9 Site Master File (SMF) or the attestation and documentation as part of this application, and acknowledgement of 
responsibility to prepare and submit the SMF 
10 Local area plan 
11 Building floor plan 
12 Layout 
13 Equipment inventory 
14 Quality manual or Quality Assurance report (minimum SOPs and documentary evidence as required in the 
application preamble) 
15 Additional site copy of pharmacy premises licence, SAPC certificate of recording, and others as for primary site. 
16 Quality assurance report including complete SOPs for: 
Quality assurance product release 
Recall 
Finished product specifications and testing 
Determination of shelf-life 
Product sterilisation (if applicable) 
Records of Quality assurance product release 
Finished product specifications and testing 
Determination of shelf life (expiry date) 
List of SOPs (titles and numbers related to Quality management system)  
17 List of products 
18 Confirmation of understanding of responsibilities 
19 Proof of payment 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
December 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 17 of 18 
e. Completion of a licence product list (section 3D product list) is required as part of the SAHPRA licence 
application. A tutorial video for guidance on the completion of the section 3D product list is available online 
for registered users at www.sahpracm.org.za – Cat. D Medicines - Media.  
f. 
Retention of a SAHPRA category D licence is subject to the payment of an annual fee as determined by the 
SAHPRA and specified in the Regulations Regarding Fees Payable in terms of the provisions of the 
Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965). 
g. The pharmacy premises licence, certificates of recording for the pharmacy and pharmacy owner, and 
responsible pharmacist registration certificate must be forwarded to the SAHPRA as final confirmation of 
meeting the licensing requirements. 
h. Retention of the recording of a pharmacy with the SAPC is subject to the payment of an annual fee as 
determined by the SAPC and specified in the Fees Payable to the Council under the Pharmacy Act, 1974 
(Act 53 of 1974).  
i. 
Concerning the SAHPRA inspection, the holder of the licence is inspected for verification of compliance to 
the minimum requirements as included in the attestation when the application was submitted to SAHPRA. 
j. 
A licensing application in terms of either process may be recommended for refusal or rejection at or because 
of any information obtained by any of steps 2, 3, 5, 8 and 13.  
 
 
 
Roadmap and transitional process for the regulation of complementary medicines 
November 2021 
 
7.02_Roadmap_for_CMs_Dec21_v2_3 
 
Page 18 of 18 
 
FIGURE 1:  
PROCESS FLOW FOR NEW APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES LIMITED TO COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINES 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
14 
13 
15 
