SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 1 of 16
 
 
 
01 August 2022 
 
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
This guideline assists sponsors of clinical investigations in developing monitoring strategies and plans for investigational studies of medical 
products, including human medicine and biological products, medical devices, and combinations thereof.  The overarching goal is to 
enhance human participant protection and the quality of clinical trial data by focusing sponsor oversight on the most important aspects of 
study conduct and reporting.  While this guideline makes it clear that sponsors, and clinical research organisations (CROs) acting on their 
behalf, can use a variety of approaches to fulfil their responsibilities for monitoring Principal investigator (PI) conduct and performance in 
investigational studies.  It must be highlighted that the responsibility for adequate oversight of the conduct of a clinical trial, including the 
justification for and selection of monitoring methods, remains that of the sponsor solely.  SAHPRA reserves the right to request any 
additional information and may make amendments in keeping with the knowledge which is current at the time of consideration. 
Document History 
Final 
Version 
Reason for Amendment 
Effective Date 
 
1 
New title and number 2.43 published for implementation 
November 2016 
2 
Published for implementation 
October 2019 
3 
Changes in section 2.1 
March 2021 
4 
Administrative changes  
Change of document number from 2.43 to SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 
August 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 2 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
Contents 
Document History .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary ............................................................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
BACKGROUND ........................................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
Definitions ............................................................................................................................................ 5 
2.2 
Current Monitoring Practices .............................................................................................................. 5 
2.3 
Approach to Risk-Based Monitoring ................................................................................................... 6 
3. 
OVERVIEW OF MONITORING METHODS .................................................................................................. 6 
3.1 
On-site and Centralised Monitoring .................................................................................................... 6 
3.1.1 
On-site Monitoring ....................................................................................................................... 6 
3.1.2 
Centralised Monitoring ................................................................................................................. 7 
3.2 
Examples of monitoring practices and activities ................................................................................ 7 
3.2.1 
Communication with study site staff ............................................................................................ 8 
3.2.2 
Review of site’s processes, procedures, and records .................................................................... 8 
3.2.3 
Source data verification and corroboration.................................................................................. 9 
4. 
RISK-BASED MONITORING ........................................................................................................................ 9 
4.1 
Identify critical data and processes to be monitored ......................................................................... 9 
4.2 
Risk assessment ................................................................................................................................. 10 
4.3 
Factors to consider when developing a monitoring plan ................................................................. 11 
4.4 
Monitoring plan ................................................................................................................................. 12 
4.4.1 
Description of Monitoring Approaches ....................................................................................... 12 
4.4.2 
Communication of Monitoring Results ....................................................................................... 13 
4.4.3 
Management of Noncompliance ................................................................................................ 13 
4.4.4 
Ensuring Quality Monitoring ...................................................................................................... 13 
4.4.5 
Monitoring Plan Amendments .................................................................................................... 13 
4.5 
Documenting monitoring activities ................................................................................................... 14 
5. 
ADDITIONAL STRATEGIES TO ENSURE STUDY QUALITY ........................................................................ 14 
5.1 
Protocol and Case Report Form design ............................................................................................. 14 
5.2 
Principal Investigator training and communication ......................................................................... 14 
5.3 
Delegation of monitoring responsibilities to a CRO ......................................................................... 15 
5.4 
Principal Investigator and site selection and initiation .................................................................... 15 
6. 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................ 15 
7. 
VALIDITY .................................................................................................................................................. 16 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 3 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term 
Meaning 
CRFs 
Case Report Forms 
CROs 
Clinical Research Organisations 
EDC 
Electronic Data Capture  
IRB 
Institutional Review Board 
ICH 
International Conference on Harmonisation  
ISO 
International Standards Organization 
PI 
Principal Investigator 
RBM 
Risk-based monitoring 
SDV 
Source Data Verification 
SAHPRA 
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 4 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This guideline assists sponsors of clinical investigations in developing monitoring strategies and plans for 
investigational studies of medical products, including human medicine and biological products, medical devices, and 
combinations thereof.  The overarching goal is to enhance human participant protection and the quality of clinical 
trial data by focusing sponsor oversight on the most important aspects of study conduct and reporting. 
While this guideline makes it clear that sponsors, and clinical research organisations (CROs) acting on their behalf, 
can use a variety of approaches to fulfil their responsibilities for monitoring Principal Investigator (PI) conduct and 
performance in investigational studies.  It must be highlighted that the responsibility for adequate oversight of the 
conduct of a clinical trial, including the justification for and selection of monitoring methods, remains that of the 
sponsor solely.  The consequences of inadequate monitoring are the sole responsibility of the sponsor or its 
representative. 
2. BACKGROUND 
Effective monitoring of clinical trials by sponsors is critical to the protection of human participants and the conduct 
of high-quality studies.  Sponsors of clinical trials involving human medicines, biological products, medical devices, 
and combinations thereof are required to provide oversight to ensure adequate protection of the rights, welfare, and 
safety of human participants and the quality of the clinical trial data submitted to the South African Health Products 
Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA).  The SAHPRA requires sponsors to monitor the conduct and progress of their clinical 
trials.  
During the past decade, the number and complexity of clinical trials have grown dramatically.  These changes create 
new challenges to clinical trial oversight, particularly increased variability in clinical investigator experience, site 
infrastructure, treatment choices, and standards of health care, as well as challenges related to geographic 
dispersion.  At the same time, increasing use of electronic systems and records, as well as improvements in statistical 
assessments and pharmacovigilance, present opportunities for alternative monitoring approaches that can improve 
the quality and efficiency of sponsor oversight of clinical trials. 
SAHPRA encourages sponsors to develop monitoring plans that manage important risks to human participants and 
data quality and address the challenges of oversight, in part by taking advantage of the innovations in modern clinical 
trials.  
This guideline focuses principally on monitoring, which is one aspect of the processes and procedures needed to 
ensure clinical trial quality and participant safety.  Monitoring is a quality control tool for determining whether study 
activities are being carried out as required so that deficiencies can be identified and corrected.  Monitoring or 
oversight alone cannot ensure quality.  Rather, quality is an overarching objective that must be built into the clinical 
trial enterprise.  
The term monitoring is used in different ways in the clinical trial context.  It can refer to the assessment of Principal 
Investigator (PI) conduct, oversight, and reporting of findings of a clinical trial; to the ongoing evaluation of safety 
data and the emerging benefit-risk profile of an investigational product (IP); and to the monitoring of internal sponsor 
and CRO processes and systems integral to proposing, designing, performing, recording, supervising, reviewing, or 
reporting clinical investigations. 
For purposes of this guideline, monitoring refers to the methods used by sponsors of investigational studies, or CRO’s 
delegated responsibilities for the conduct of studies, to oversee the conduct of, and reporting of data from clinical 
investigations, including appropriate PI supervision of study site staff and third party contractors.  Monitoring 
activities include communication with the PI and study site staff; review of the study site’s processes, procedures, 
and records; and verification of the accuracy of data submitted to the sponsor. 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 5 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
2.1 
Definitions 
Risk-based monitoring (RBM) is a monitoring technique that involves the use of validated tools in the evaluation 
and assessment of risk in the oversight of the quality of data and using the risk assessment to increase or decrease 
on site monitoring and/or Source Data Verification (SDV).   
Remote monitoring is the technique of monitoring sites offsite by involving the site in verification of source data 
for example asking the site to confirm the time of consenting.  It implies the reliance on the site itself to augment 
or replace onsite monitoring.  This may involve the use of digital platforms to monitor the site.   
Centralised or central monitoring is the use of data generated on site which is used by the sponsor offsite to 
evaluate and assess risk and deviations from the protocol or the median and is not dependant on the site verifying 
the data.  Centralised monitoring can be used to augment RBM or on-site monitoring. 
On-site monitoring is an in-person evaluation carried out by sponsor personnel or representatives at the sites at 
which the clinical investigation is being conducted.  On site monitoring is the tradition technique where a monitor 
reviews source on site to ensure compliance and data quality.  On site monitoring may involve the use of 
centralised tools and remote access to facilitate efficiencies and streamline on site visits.  
Remote access to data and even source can be facilitated by the advancement in electronic systems and the 
increasing use of electronic records.  Remote access to source documents which meets all the ethical and legal 
requirements for participant protection and safety allows for review and monitoring offsite but is then essentially 
equivalent to onsite monitoring in many but not all aspects.  Ideally, remote access should be used to augment 
and focus on-site monitoring along with RBM tools. 
2.2 
Current Monitoring Practices 
Historically, a range of practices have been used to monitor the conduct of clinical trials.  These practices vary in 
intensity, focus, and methodology and include centralised monitoring of clinical data by statistical and data 
management personnel; targeted on-site visits to higher risk sites (e.g. where centralised monitoring suggests 
problems at a site), and frequent, comprehensive on-site visits to all sites by sponsor personnel or representatives 
(e.g. clinical monitors or clinical research associates). 
Periodic, frequent visits to each site to evaluate study conduct and review data for each enrolled participant 
remain the predominant mechanism by which pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and medical device companies 
monitor the progress of clinical investigations.  For major efficacy trials, companies typically conduct on-site 
monitoring visits at approximately 4- to 8-week intervals.  This type of traditional frequent on-site monitoring 
visit model, with 100 % verification of all data, historically has been the SAHPRA’s preferred way for sponsors to 
meet their monitoring obligations.  
The 1996 International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidance on good clinical practice (ICH E6) and the 2011 International 
Standards Organization (ISO) Clinical investigation of medical devices for human subjects – good clinical practice 
(ISO 14155:2011) address monitoring.  Both ICH E6 and ISO 14155:2011 specifically provide for flexibility in how 
trials are monitored.  Both E6 and ISO 14155:2011 advise sponsors to consider the objective, design, complexity, 
size, and endpoints of a trial in determining the extent and nature of monitoring for a given trial.  Although the 
ICH guidance and ISO standard specifically provide for the possibility of reduced or even no on-site monitoring, 
they also make clear that it would be appropriate to rely entirely on centralised monitoring only in exceptional 
circumstances. 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 6 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
2.3 
Approach to Risk-Based Monitoring 
A risk-based approach to monitoring (RBM) by definition involves the use of validated tools in the evaluation and 
assessment of risk in the oversight in the quality of data.  It does not imply nor is equivalent to remote or off-site 
monitoring, and must be distinguished from this. 
While it does not suggest any less vigilance in the oversight of clinical investigations, there is the danger that the 
risk-based monitoring may offer less oversight than the traditional monitoring approaches.  RBM focuses sponsor 
oversight activities on preventing or mitigating important and likely risks to data quality and to processes critical 
to human participant protection and trial data integrity.  Moreover, a risk-based approach is dynamic, more 
readily facilitating continual improvement in trial conduct and oversight.  For example, monitoring findings should 
be evaluated to determine whether additional actions (e.g. training of clinical investigator and site staff, 
clarification of protocol requirements) are necessary to ensure human participant protection and data quality 
across sites.  Sponsors should be prepared to augment RBM if necessary as it is an imperative of the concept of 
RBM.  
The SAHPRA believes that RBM could improve sponsor oversight of clinical investigations if understood and 
executed correctly.  RBM and the reliance on technological advances (e.g. remote risk and quality management 
tools and processes), can meet statutory and regulatory requirements under appropriate circumstances. 
The incorporation of centralised monitoring practices, where appropriate, should improve a sponsor’s ability to 
ensure the quality of clinical trial data.  While several publications suggest that certain data anomalies (e.g. fraud, 
including fabrication of data, and other non-random data distributions) may be more readily detected by 
centralised monitoring techniques than by on-site monitoring, there is also confusion around both terminology 
and implementation.  While adequate training may address some of these issues, it has been suggested that a 
statistical approach to central monitoring can help improve the effectiveness of on-site monitoring by prioritising 
site visits and by guiding site visits with central statistical data checks.   
The SAHPRA encourages sponsors to tailor monitoring plans to the needs of the trial.  The advancement in 
electronic systems and increasing use of electronic records (i.e. electronic data capture [EDC] systems) facilitate 
remote access to electronic data and, increasingly, to some source data although limited.  Additionally, statistical 
assessments using data submitted on paper case report forms (CRFs) or via EDC may permit timely identification 
of clinical sites that require additional training, monitoring, or both.  
The SAHPRA acknowledges that there is limited empirical data to support the utility of the various methods 
employed to monitor clinical investigations (e.g. superiority of one method versus another), including data to 
support on-site monitoring.  As a result, the recommendations are based, in part, on the SAHPRA’s experience 
from the review of protocols, data submitted in pre-approval applications, and the results of inspections 
conducted to ensure human participant protection and data integrity. 
 
3. OVERVIEW OF MONITORING METHODS 
3.1 
On-site and Centralised Monitoring 
This section is intended to assist sponsors in identifying and designing monitoring practices appropriate to a given 
clinical trial.  It describes some of the capabilities of on-site and centralised monitoring processes and factors to 
consider in determining which monitoring practices may be appropriate for a given clinical trial. 
3.1.1 
On-site Monitoring 
On-site monitoring is an in-person evaluation carried out by sponsor personnel or representatives at the sites 
at which the clinical investigation is being conducted. 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 7 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
On-site monitoring can identify data entry errors (e.g. discrepancies between source records and CRFs) and 
missing data in source records or CRFs; provide assurance that study documentation exists; assess the familiarity 
of the site’s study staff with the protocol and required procedures; and assess compliance with the protocol 
and investigational product accountability. 
On-site monitoring can also provide a sense of the quality of the overall conduct of the trial at a site (e.g. 
attention to detail, thoroughness of study documentation, appropriate delegation of study tasks, and 
appropriate PI supervision of site staff performing critical study functions). 
On-site monitoring can therefore be particularly helpful early in a study, especially if the protocol is complex 
and includes novel procedures with which PIs may be unfamiliar.  Findings at the site may lead to training efforts 
at both the site visited and elsewhere.  
3.1.2 
Centralised Monitoring 
Centralised monitoring is a remote evaluation carried out by sponsor personnel or representatives (e.g. clinical 
monitors, data management personnel, or statisticians) at a location other than the sites at which the clinical 
investigation is being conducted.  Centralised monitoring processes can provide some of the capabilities of on-
site monitoring as well as additional capabilities. 
The types of monitoring activities and the extent to which centralised monitoring practices can be employed 
depend on various factors, including the sponsor’s use of electronic systems; the sponsor’s access to 
participants’ electronic records, if applicable; the timeliness of data entry from paper CRF, if applicable; and 
communication tools available to the sponsor and study site.  These may vary by study and by site. Sponsors 
who plan to use centralised monitoring processes should ensure that the processes and expectations for site 
record keeping, data entry, and reporting are well-defined and ensure timely access to clinical trial data and 
supporting documentation. 
If sponsors intend to rely heavily on centralised monitoring practices, they should identify, in the monitoring 
plan, the limitations of this plan, and when more on-site monitoring visits would be indicated, noting that 
monitoring remains a sole responsibility of the sponsor.   
3.2 
Examples of monitoring practices and activities 
Monitoring activities broadly include communication with the PI and study site staff; review of the study site’s 
processes, procedures, and records; and verification of the accuracy of data submitted to the sponsor.  
Centralised monitoring techniques should be used to the extent appropriate and feasible to: 
Supplement or reduce the frequency and extent of on-site monitoring with monitoring activities that can be done 
as well or better remotely or with monitoring activities that can be accomplished using centralised processes 
only.  Examples include:  
o 
Monitor data quality through routine review of submitted data to identify and follow-up on missing data, 
inconsistent data, data outliers, and potential protocol deviations that may be indicative of systemic or 
significant errors in data collection and reporting at a site; 
o 
Conduct statistical analyses to identify data trends not easily detected by on-site monitoring, such as:  
➢ 
Standard checks of the ranges, consistency, and completeness of data  
➢ 
Checks for unusual distribution of data within and between study sites, such as data with too little 
variance  
o 
Analyse site characteristics, performance metrics (e.g. high screen failure or withdrawal rates, high 
frequency of eligibility violations, delays in reporting data), and clinical data to identify trial sites with 
characteristics correlated with poor performance or noncompliance; 
o 
Verify critical source data remotely as described in the monitoring plan, in cases where such source data 
are accessible, or where CRF data are, according to the protocol, source data;  
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 8 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
o 
Complete administrative and regulatory tasks.  Such tasks include, for example, verifying continuous 
institutional review board (IRB) approval by reviewing electronic IRB correspondence, if available; 
performing portions of investigational product accountability, such as comparison of randomisation and 
CRF data, to preliminarily assess whether the participant was administered or dispensed the assigned 
product and to evaluate consistency between investigational product receipt, use, and disposition 
records; and verifying whether previously requested CRF corrections were made. 
Centralised techniques, including routine review of submitted data and statistical and other analyses, may also 
be used to identify significant concerns (e.g. need for clarification of a protocol procedure, indications of data 
fabrication) with non-critical data that may not have otherwise been a focus of monitoring. 
Target on-site monitoring by identifying higher risk clinical sites (e.g. sites with data anomalies or a higher 
frequency of errors, protocol violations, or dropouts relative to other sites), through the activities described 
above.  Such findings, whether related to critical or non-critical data, may warrant on-site visits or more intensive 
and consideration of further on-site monitoring. 
The following sections provide additional descriptions of various monitoring approaches. 
3.2.1 
Communication with study site staff 
Communication between the monitor and the study site staff is an essential component of the clinical trial.  
Various modes of communication (e.g. teleconferences, videoconferencing, e-mail) could be considered for 
specific study time points (e.g. study initiation) and activities (e.g. to discuss findings of a monitor’s eCRF review, 
training of new site staff).  Communication with sites does not involve evaluation or review of data by sponsor 
personnel or representatives. 
3.2.2 
Review of site’s processes, procedures, and records 
Techniques for monitoring informed consent and site records are included here as examples of approaches to 
monitoring site’s processes, procedures, and records. 
a) 
Informed consent  
Verification of participants’ informed consent is a critical activity that should be monitored.  Alternatives 
to the traditional approach (monitors verifying the original signature on the consent form for each 
participant at the site) may be effective in identifying inadequacies in the consent process. 
The study site sending documents electronically (e.g. fax, e-mail) to the monitor off-site may not be 
appropriate.  The monitor may perform remote comparison of dates of study procedures and 
documentation of informed consent on CRFs.  A secure internet portal that enables the site staff to 
upload signed consent forms and enables access by designated monitors is a tool that can be considered. 
Use of electronic informed consent may also facilitate sponsor oversight of human participant 
protection.  Sponsors must attend to privacy and confidentiality concerns when considering techniques 
for monitoring informed consent. 
b) 
Site’s records 
A growing portion of source documents (e.g. laboratory and radiology reports, source documents 
submitted by the PI for other purposes such as health records documenting serious adverse events or 
adjudicated events) are electronic and may be available to the sponsor remotely.  Sponsors may not 
have remote access to electronic health records maintained by hospitals, universities, and other 
institutions because of data privacy and security concerns as well as technological challenges.  
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 9 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
3.2.3 
Source data verification and corroboration 
The sponsor should consider the quantity and types of source data that need to be verified against CRFs or 
corroborated against other records (e.g. review of medical record to corroborate a participant’s response of “no 
hospitalisations” since the previous visit on a CRF) during the sponsor’s identification of critical data and 
processes or in the risk assessment, or both. 
The sponsor should include a description of the quantity and types of source records to verify or corroborate in 
the monitoring plan. 
The sponsor should consider which source records are likely to provide the most meaningful information about 
a participant’s participation and the PI’s conduct and oversight.  For example, for a particular study, there may 
be minimal benefit in comparing 100 % of the source data for each participant to the CRFs for each study visit.  
Rather, it may be sufficient to compare the most critical data points for a sample of participants and study visits 
as an indicator of data accuracy. 
Similarly, for a particular study, although collection of all concomitant medications, body temperature, and body 
weight are required by the protocol and are documented in the medical record and transcribed to a CRF, they 
may not be identified by the sponsor as critical data, because a small error rate in those variables would not 
affect the outcome of the trial.  In the absence of information indicating potential concerns with the data (e.g. 
sites with data anomalies, inconsistent data), source document verification or corroboration of these non-
critical data may not provide significantly useful information to the sponsor. 
 
4. RISK-BASED MONITORING 
No single approach to monitoring is appropriate for every clinical trial.  The SAHPRA recommends that each 
sponsor design a monitoring plan that is tailored to the specific human participant protection and data integrity 
risks of the trial.  Ordinarily, such a risk-based plan would include a mix of centralised and on-site monitoring 
practices.  The monitoring plan should identify the various methods intended to be used and the rationale for their 
use. 
Monitoring activities should focus on preventing or mitigating important and likely sources of error in the conduct, 
collection, and reporting of critical data and processes necessary for human participant protection and trial 
integrity.  Sponsors should prospectively identify critical data and processes, then perform a risk assessment to 
identify and understand the risks that could affect the collection of critical data or the performance of critical 
processes, and then develop a monitoring plan that focuses on the important and likely risks to critical data and 
processes. 
4.1 
Identify critical data and processes to be monitored 
Sponsors should prospectively identify critical data and processes that if inaccurate, not performed, or performed 
incorrectly, would threaten the protection of human participants or the integrity of the study results. 
As examples, the following types of data and processes should ordinarily be identified as critical: 
o 
Verification that informed consent was obtained appropriately;  
o 
Adherence to protocol eligibility criteria designed to exclude individuals for whom the investigational 
product may be less safe than the protocol intended and to include only participants from the targeted 
study population for whom the test article is most appropriate;  
o 
Procedures for documenting appropriate accountability and administration of the investigational 
product (e.g. ensuring the integrity of randomisation at the site level, where appropriate).  
Conduct and documentation of procedures and assessments related to: 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 10 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
o 
Study endpoints;  
o 
Protocol-required safety assessments;  
o 
Evaluating, documenting, and reporting serious adverse events and unanticipated adverse device effects, 
participant deaths, and withdrawals, especially when a withdrawal may be related to an adverse event.  
Conduct and documentation of procedures essential to trial integrity, such as ensuring the study blind is 
maintained, both at the site level and at the sponsor level, as appropriate, referring specified events for 
adjudication, and allocation concealment. 
Other types of data (e.g. covariates such as concomitant treatments or demographic characteristics, routine 
laboratory tests performed as part of participant monitoring that do not address protocol specified safety or 
efficacy endpoints) and processes (e.g. a hospital pharmacy’s storage of an investigational product with no 
specific critical handling instructions) identified by the sponsor as non-critical often may be monitored less 
intensively. 
There is increasing recognition that some types of errors in a clinical trial are more important than others. 
For example, a low, but non-zero rate of errors in capturing certain baseline characteristics of enrolled 
participants (e.g. age, concomitant treatment, or concomitant illness) will not, in general, have a significant effect 
on study results if the errors are distributed randomly.  In contrast, a small number of errors related to study 
endpoints (e.g. not following protocol-specified definitions) can profoundly affect study results, as could failure 
to report rare but important adverse events.  
4.2 
Risk assessment  
This guideline also discusses risk assessment, a component of risk management, as applied in the context of 
clinical monitoring.  Risk assessment generally involves identifying risks, analysing risks, and then determining 
whether risks need to be modified by implementing controls (e.g. processes, policies, or practices).  The risk 
assessment recommended in this guideline to inform development of a monitoring plan may also support efforts 
to manage risks across a clinical trial (e.g. through modifying the protocol design or implementation) or 
development program. 
This guideline does not provide comprehensive detail on how to perform a risk assessment.  There are many risk 
assessment methodologies and tools from a variety of industries that can be applied to clinical trials.   These 
should be validated. 
Following the identification of critical data and processes, sponsors should perform a risk assessment to identify 
and understand the nature, sources, and potential causes of risks that could affect the collection of critical data 
or the performance of critical processes.  Risks to critical data and processes merit consideration during risk 
assessment, to ensure that monitoring efforts are focused on preventing or mitigating important and likely 
sources of error in their conduct, collection and reporting. 
Risk identification for monitoring purposes should generally consider the types of data to be collected, the specific 
activities required to collect these data, and the range of potential safety and other human participant protection 
concerns that are inherent to the clinical investigation (e.g. based on trial design or investigational product). 
The identified risks should be assessed and prioritised by considering the likelihood of errors occurring and the 
impact of such errors on human participant protection and trial integrity the extent to which such errors would 
be detectable. 
Sponsors should use the results of the risk assessment in developing the monitoring plan (e.g. determining which 
risks may be addressed through monitoring, determining the types and intensity of monitoring activities best 
suited to addressing these risks).  Sponsors may also determine that some risks are better managed through 
activities other than monitoring, for example, modifying the protocol to remove the source of the risk.  Sponsors 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 11 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
should periodically evaluate emerging risks and whether monitoring activities require modification to effectively 
oversee the risks. 
4.3 
Factors to consider when developing a monitoring plan 
A monitoring plan ordinarily should focus on preventing or mitigating important and likely risks, identified by the 
risk assessment, to critical data and processes.  The types (e.g. on-site, centralised), frequency (e.g. early, for 
initial assessment and training versus throughout the study), and extent (e.g. comprehensive [100 % data 
verification] versus targeted or random review of certain data [less than 100 % data verification]) of monitoring 
activities will depend to some degree on a range of factors, considered during the risk assessment, including the 
following: 
o 
Complexity of the study design  
More intensive monitoring (e.g. increased frequency and extent of review) may be necessary as study 
design complexity increases.  
o 
Types of study endpoints  
Endpoints that are more interpretative or participative may require on-site visits to assess the totality of 
participant records and to review application of protocol definitions with the PI.  More objective endpoints (e.g. 
death, hospitalisation, or clinical laboratory values and standard measurements) may be more suitable for 
remote verification.  Endpoints for which inappropriate participant withdrawal or lack of follow-up may impede 
study evaluation are likely to need more intensive monitoring to identify the reason(s) participants are 
withdrawing and to determine whether follow-up can be improved. 
o 
Clinical complexity of the study population  
A study that involves a population that is seriously ill or vulnerable may require more intensive monitoring 
and consideration of on-site monitoring visits to be sure appropriate protection is being provided. 
o 
Geography  
Sites in geographic areas where there are differences in standards of medical practice or participant 
demographics, or where there is a less established clinical trial infrastructure may require more intensive 
monitoring and consideration of on-site monitoring visits. 
o 
Relative experience of the PI and of the sponsor with the PI 
PIs who lack significant experience in conducting and overseeing investigations, using a novel or innovative 
medical device, or with the surgical procedure associated with medical device use may benefit from more 
intensive monitoring and frequent communication to ensure PI understanding of responsibilities.  In 
addition, the relative experience of a sponsor with the PI may be a factor in determining an appropriate 
monitoring plan. 
o 
Electronic data capture  
Use of EDC systems with the capability to assess quality metrics (e.g. missing data, data error rates, protocol 
violations) in real-time could help identify potentially higher risk sites for the purpose of targeting sites in 
need of more intensive monitoring. 
o 
Relative safety of the investigational product  
A study of a product that has significant safety concerns or for which there is no prior experience in human 
clinical trials (e.g. a phase 1 pharmaceutical investigation or a device feasibility study) may require more 
intensive monitoring and consideration of on-site monitoring visits to ensure appropriate PI oversight of 
participant safety. 
o 
Stage of the study  
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 12 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
A tapered approach to monitoring may be used where appropriate, with more intensive monitoring at 
initiation and during early stages of a trial.  For example, a tapered approach could be used for a complex 
study where more intensive and on-site monitoring might be required early, but where, once procedures 
are established, less intensive monitoring might suffice.  Similarly, a tapered approach could be used for 
relatively inexperienced PIs. 
o 
Quantity of data  
Some centralised monitoring tools may be more useful as the quantity of data (e.g. size or duration of trial, 
number of sites) collected increases. 
4.4 
Monitoring plan 
For each clinical trial, the sponsor should develop a monitoring plan that describes the monitoring methods, 
responsibilities, and requirements for the trial. 
The monitoring plan should include a brief description of the study, its objectives, and the critical data and study 
procedures, with particular attention to data and procedures that are unusual in relation to clinical routine and 
require training of study site staff.  The plan should also communicate the specific risks to be addressed by 
monitoring and should provide those involved in monitoring with adequate information to effectively carry out 
their duties. 
A monitoring plan may reference existing policies and procedures (e.g. standard operating procedure describing 
general monitoring processes or issue investigation and resolution). 
All sponsor and CRO personnel involved with monitoring, including those who review or determine appropriate 
action regarding potential issues identified through monitoring, should review the monitoring plan and 
associated documents and appropriately trained in the conduct of the study (e.g. standard operating procedures 
or other documents referenced in the monitoring plan). 
The components of a monitoring plan might include the following: 
4.4.1 
Description of Monitoring Approaches 
A description of each monitoring method to be employed during the study and how it will be used to address 
important risks and ensure the validity of critical data. 
Criteria for determining the timing, frequency, and extent of planned monitoring activities: 
o 
Specific activities required for each monitoring method employed during the study, including reference 
to required tools, logs, or templates;  
o 
Definitions of events or results (e.g. findings from central monitoring activities) that would trigger 
changes in planned monitoring activities for a particular PI. 
For example, if it is determined that a PI differs markedly from other PIs in making safety-related findings or 
other key safety metrics, in rate of enrolment, in the number of protocol deviations, or in the rate of missing 
CRFs, the PI’s site should be considered for targeted on-site visits.  The establishment of acceptable variation 
for particular critical data and processes would facilitate identification of significant deviations.  
o 
Identification of possible deviations or failures that would be critical to study integrity and how these 
are to be recorded and reported.  
For example, sponsors may wish to establish a specific mechanism for tracking and notifying key study personnel 
of deviations related to collection or reporting of data necessary to interpret the primary endpoint, regardless 
of which monitoring method identified a concern.  
The study monitoring plan should also describe how various monitoring activities will be documented, 
regardless of whether they are conducted on-site or centrally. 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 13 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
4.4.2 
Communication of Monitoring Results  
Format, content, timing, and archiving requirements for reports and other documentation of monitoring 
activities. 
Process for appropriate communication:  
o 
Of routine monitoring results to management and other stakeholders (e.g. CRO, data management)  
o 
Of immediate reporting of significant monitoring issues to appropriate parties (e.g. sponsor 
management, PI and site staff, IRB, FDA), as necessary;  
o 
From study management and other stakeholders to monitors.  
For example, data management personnel may provide monitors with routine reports of outstanding CRFs or 
of common data queries at or across sites that may enable effective targeting of monitoring activities. 
4.4.3 
Management of Noncompliance  
Processes for addressing unresolved or significant issues (e.g. significant non-compliance with the 
investigational plan, suspected or confirmed data falsification) identified by monitoring, whether at a particular 
site or across study sites. 
Processes to ensure that root cause analyses are conducted where important deviations are discovered and 
that appropriate corrective and preventive actions (e.g. additional training on a study or site level) are 
implemented to address issues identified by monitoring. 
Other quality management practices applicable to the clinical investigation (e.g. reference to any other written 
documents describing appropriate actions regarding non-compliance). 
4.4.4 
Ensuring Quality Monitoring  
It is the sponsor’s responsibility to ensure that the monitor is both trained and qualified to undertake the 
monitoring of a specific trial.  Description of any specific training required for personnel carrying out monitoring 
activities, including personnel conducting internal data monitoring, statistical monitoring, or other centralised 
review activities should be provided. 
Training should include Good Clinical Practice, principles of clinical investigations and human participant 
protection.  In addition, study-specific training should include training on the disease under study, study trial 
design, protocol requirements, study monitoring plan, applicable standard operating procedures (SOPs), 
appropriate monitoring techniques, and applicable electronic systems.  
Planned audits of monitoring to ensure that sponsor and CRO staff conduct monitoring activities in accordance 
with the monitoring plan, applicable regulations, guidance, and sponsor policies, procedures, templates, and 
other study plans.  Auditing is a quality assurance tool that can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of 
monitoring to ensure human participant protection and data integrity. 
Many sponsors have successfully implemented on-site co-monitoring visits (i.e. monitoring visits performed by 
both a study monitor and the monitor’s supervisor or another evaluator designated by the sponsor or CRO) to 
evaluate whether monitors are effectively carrying out visit activities, in compliance with the study monitoring 
plan.  These visits may be conducted either for randomly selected monitors or may be targeted to specific 
monitors, based upon questions arising from review of monitoring visit documentation, centralised data review 
or PI feedback.  
4.4.5 
Monitoring Plan Amendments  
Sponsors should consider what events would indicate a need for review and revision of the monitoring plan and 
establish processes to permit timely updates where necessary.  For example, a protocol amendment, change in 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 14 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
the definition of significant protocol deviations, or identification of new risks to study integrity could result in a 
change to the monitoring plan. 
4.5 
Documenting monitoring activities  
Documentation of monitoring activities should generally include the following: 
o 
The date of the activity and the individual(s) conducting and participating in it;  
o 
A summary of the data or activities reviewed;  
o 
A description of any noncompliance, potential noncompliance, data irregularities, or other deficiencies 
identified;  
o 
A description of any actions taken, to be taken, or recommended, including the person responsible for 
completing actions and the anticipated date of completion.  
Documentation of monitoring should include sufficient detail to allow verification that the monitoring plan was 
followed. 
Monitoring documentation should be provided to appropriate management in a timely manner for review and 
follow-up, as indicated. 
 
5. ADDITIONAL STRATEGIES TO ENSURE STUDY QUALITY 
Although the focus of this guideline is on monitoring the oversight and conduct of, and reporting of data from, 
clinical investigations, the SAHPRA considers monitoring to be just one component of a multi-factor approach to 
ensuring the quality of clinical investigations.  Many other factors contribute to the quality of a clinical 
investigation.  This section highlights additional areas that complement monitoring and can affect study quality. 
A fundamental component of ensuring quality monitoring is a sponsor’s compliance with monitoring plans and any 
accompanying procedures. 
5.1 
Protocol and Case Report Form design 
The most important tool for ensuring human participant protection and high-quality data is a well-designed and 
articulated protocol.  A poorly designed or ambiguous protocol may introduce systemic errors that can render a 
clinical investigation unreliable despite rigorous monitoring.  Additionally, the complexity of the trial design and 
the type and amount of data collected may influence data quality.  The CRF, which captures the data required by 
the protocol, is another critical tool for which design directly affects the quality of trial data. 
Care should be taken to ensure that the CRF captures data accurately (e.g. as required by the protocol) and that 
the CRF design and instructions facilitate consistent data collection across PI sites. 
5.2 
Principal Investigator training and communication 
Clinical trial monitors conducting on-site visits have historically played an important role in training the PI and 
site staff during a study.  On-site visits also have served as a primary means of providing feedback to PIs and study 
personnel on study conduct.  Without meaningful training prior to the conduct of a study and of appropriate 
instruction during the study (e.g. when changes are made to the protocol), PIs and their staff may have difficulty 
carrying out a trial correctly.  Sponsors who plan less frequent or limited on-site monitoring should consider the 
following: 
o 
Monitoring activities should include sufficient time for discussion of PI’s and site staff’s responsibilities, 
feedback, and additional training, if needed, during the conduct of the study.  
o 
It may be necessary to implement alternative training (e.g. teleconferences, webcasts, on-line training 
modules) and communication methods for providing and documenting ongoing, timely training and 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 15 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
feedback, as well as to provide notification of significant changes to study conduct or other important 
information.  It must be considered that many of the factors that necessitate onsite monitoring may be 
relevant and this should be considered.  
5.3 
Delegation of monitoring responsibilities to a CRO 
If a sponsor of a study delegates the responsibility for ensuring proper monitoring to a CRO, the SAHPRA would 
require the written transfer of any obligations from a sponsor to a CRO and require the CRO to comply with the 
regulations.  Although sponsors can transfer responsibilities for monitoring to a CRO(s), they retain responsibility 
for oversight of the work completed by the CRO(s) that assume this responsibility.  
Sponsors should evaluate CRO compliance with regulatory requirements and contractual obligations in an 
ongoing manner.  For example, sponsor oversight of monitoring performed by a CRO may include the sponsor’s 
periodic review of monitoring reports and vendor performance or quality metrics and documented 
communication between the sponsor and CRO regarding monitoring progress and findings. 
Sponsors and CROs should consider additional factors when a sponsor transfers responsibilities for monitoring to 
a CRO.  Sponsors and CROs should prospectively establish a clear understanding of both parties’ responsibilities 
and of the expectations for the conduct of the transferred obligations. 
Sponsors should share information with a CRO that may inform decisions a CRO may make regarding the 
monitoring practices for a trial (e.g. findings of a risk assessment).  Sponsors should prospectively evaluate 
monitoring procedures and monitoring plans developed by a CRO to ensure the monitoring approach is consistent 
with applicable aspects of the trial.  In addition, sponsors and CROs should have processes in place for timely 
exchange of relevant information (e.g. significant monitoring findings, significant changes in risk for a trial). 
5.4 
Principal Investigator and site selection and initiation 
In addition to regulatory requirements for PI selection, sponsors should consider factors such as sponsor’s 
previous experience with the PI or site, workload of the PI and study staff, and resource availability at the study 
site during PI and site selection. 
Site training and initiation is a critical study activity that often involves sponsor personnel from a range of 
disciplines, including monitors.  Key components of site initiation include ensuring the PIs and site staff 
understands their responsibilities, including applicable regulatory requirements as well as study processes and 
procedures, including the sponsor’s processes for monitoring the investigation.  Communication and 
documentation tools for monitoring discussed in this guideline can also be used for site selection and initiation 
activities. 
 
6. REFERENCES  
Guidance for Industry. 2013.  Oversight of Clinical Investigations - A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring. FDA. 
August. 
International Standard. 2011. Clinical investigation of medical devices for human subjects-Good Clinical Practice. 
ISO14155.  2nd edition.  
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human 
Use. (1996) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline. Guideline for Good Clinical Practice. Current Step 4 version dated 
10 June 1996 (including the Post Step 4 corrections). 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-CT-04 OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS_AUGUST 2022 _v4 
Page 16 of 16
OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
 
 
 
7. VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces Oversight and 
Monitoring in Clinical Trials, old document number 2.43.  It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when 
required. 
 
 
