SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 1 of 24
 
 
 
10 April 2026 
GWP GUIDELINE FOR THE IMPORTERS AND DISTRIBUTORS OF 
SCHEDULED SUBSTANCES 
Objective 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit an application for a 
licence to import and /or distribute substances listed in the schedules in terms of the Medicines Act intended 
for use in the manufacturing and/or compounding of medicines or scheduled substances. Furthermore, this 
guideline document does not provide a stand-alone guidance on GWP and GMP for importers and distributors 
of scheduled substances used in the manufacturing and/or compounding of medicines and related 
substances. It is also not intended as an exclusive approach leaflet and should thus not be taken as a complete 
or authoritative statement of the law. SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to 
establish the safety, quality and efficacy of any scheduled substance used in the manufacturing and/or 
compounding of medicines or related substances in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of 
evaluation. SAHPRA is committed to ensuring that any scheduled substance used in the manufacturing of all 
registered medicines will be of the required quality, safety, and efficacy and that the manufacturer of such 
scheduled substances complies with acceptable quality assurance principles and good manufacturing 
practices as determined by SAHPRA during the manufacturing and importation of such scheduled substances 
into the Republic of South Africa. It is important that applicants adhere to the administrative requirements to 
avoid delays in the processing and evaluation of their applications.   
 
The guidance in this Guidelines and application forms are available from the Office of the SAHPRA Chief 
Executive Officer and the SAHPRA website www.sahpra.org.za or https://www.sahpra.org.za/inspectorate-
pharma licencing-and-regulatory-compliance/ 
 
Document History 
Final 
Version 
Reason for Amendment 
Effective Date 
[dd Month yyyy] 
1 
Date of Finalization/Implementation 
April 2024 
2 
Addition of Section 9: Application Processing Timelines 
March 2026 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 2 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
Contents 
Document History ................................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary ................................................................................................................................................................ 3 
SAHPRA ................................................................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 
Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.2 
Scope .......................................................................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
3. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES .................................................................................................................................. 6 
3.1 
Quality Management System (QMS) .......................................................................................................... 7 
3.2 
Personnel .................................................................................................................................................... 7 
3.3 
Documentation .......................................................................................................................................... 8 
3.4 
Premises and Equipment ......................................................................................................................... 10 
3.5 
Operations ................................................................................................................................................ 11 
3.6 
Returns, Complaints and Recalls .............................................................................................................. 14 
4. 
WHO MUST APPLY FOR A LICENCE TO IMPORT AND DISTRIBUTE SCHEDULED SUBSTANCES (INCLUDING 
CONTROLLED SCHEDULED SUBSTANCES) ........................................................................................................... 17 
5. 
HOW TO OBTAIN A LICENCE (APPLICATION FORM AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE 
SUBMITTED)........................................................................................................................................................ 17 
6. 
INSPECTION (AS STIPULATED IN REGULATION 23(3) OF THE GENERAL REGULATIONS TO ACT 101 OF 
1965) …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..19 
7. 
POWER TO SUSPEND OR REVOKE A LICENCE TO IMPORT AND DISTRIBUTE A SCHEDULED SUBSTANCE 
(AS PER PROVISION OF SECTION 22E OF ACT 101). ........................................................................................... 20 
8. 
FEES PAYABLE ........................................................................................................................................... 21 
9. 
CONTACT DETAILS .................................................................................................................................... 22 
10. 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 24 
11. 
VALIDITY ................................................................................................................................................... 24 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 3 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term 
Meaning 
Act 53 of 1974 
The Pharmacy Act 53 of 1974 as amended 
Act 101 of 1965/Medicine 
Act 
Medicines and Related Substances Act 101 of 1965 as amended 
ASMF 
Active Substance Master File 
CAPA  
Corrective And Preventive Actions 
CEO 
Chief Executive Officer 
DMF 
Drug Master File 
EHD 
Extended Health Detention 
GDP 
Good Distribution Practice 
GMP 
Good Manufacturing Practice 
GMCP 
Good Medicine Compounding Practice 
GPP 
Good Pharmacy Practice 
GWP 
Good Wholesaling Practice 
NDOH 
National Department of Health 
QMS 
Quality Management Systems  
RP 
Responsible Pharmacist 
SAHPRA 
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (also known as The 
Authority) 
SAPC 
South African Pharmacy Council 
SCHEDULED SUBSTANCE 
It means any medicine or other substances prescribed by the Minister under 
Section 22A of Act 101 of 1965 
 
https://www.sahpra.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Consolidated-
Schedules_24-March-2023.pdf  
SMF 
Site Master File 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide guidance for a wholesaler to import (or procure) and 
distribute scheduled substances used in the manufacturing of registered medicines and/or related 
substances for human and animal use that are controlled in terms of the provisions of the Medicines 
Act. 
The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA or The Authority) regulates medicines 
for human and animal use, in accordance with the provisions of the Medicines and Related Substances 
Act; (Act 101 of 1965) as amended and the relevant Regulations made thereunder. (Hereafter referred 
to as the Act 101 of 1965 or the Medicines Act.) Amongst other things, it is unlawful for medicines or 
scheduled substances to be imported, manufactured, distributed, and sold or supplied in the Republic 
of South Africa (RSA) and/or exported out of the Republic of South Africa except in accordance with the 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 4 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
appropriate authorization, registration certificates, licences, clinical trial approvals or exemptions 
obtained from the Authority. The licensing system includes SAHPRA, the Chief Executive Officer of 
SAHPRA and the Program: Inspectorate and Regulatory Compliance, whose duties comprise the issue of 
licences to those engaged in the sale or supply of medicines and scheduled substances by way of 
wholesale dealing. Furthermore, the Good Wholesaling Practice (GWP), Good Manufacturing Practice 
(GMP) Inspectors and SAHPRA are responsible for ensuring that licence holders comply with the 
provisions and conditions of their licences. The importation and/or distribution of veterinary medicine 
or scheduled substances for animal use, registered with The Authority in terms of the provisions of the 
Medicines Act, are subject to the same legislation and the requirements are similar.  
1.1 Purpose 
This guideline addresses applicants who wish to apply for a wholesaling licence to only import and 
distribute scheduled substances for the manufacturing of registered medicines, and/or compounding 
in terms of the Pharmacy Act and the Medicines Act. 
These guidelines complement the rules on distribution as set out in the SA Guide to GMP on Basic 
Requirements for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (including IPI) and also apply to distributors of 
scheduled substances manufactured by themselves. 
Any manufacturing activities in relation to the scheduled substances, including re-packaging, re-
labelling, or dividing up, are subject to SA Guide to GMP on Basic Requirements for Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients (including IPI) and are thus not covered by this guideline document. 
1.2 Scope 
This document lays down guidelines of how to apply for a Wholesale licence to Import and distribute 
scheduled substances used in the manufacturing and compounding of Medicines and Related 
Substances and applies equally to products for human and for veterinary use as per Act 101 of 1965. 
The document further describes the process to be followed when importing a scheduled substances 
into the Republic of South Africa as per Regulation 6 of the general regulations of the Medicine Act, 
when it is intended to be used in the manufacturing or compounding of medicines or active 
pharmaceutical ingredients. 
Although General Regulation 6 applies to “medicine of scheduled substance”, it also needs to be read 
with the preamble exception for industrial or analytical purposes.  
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 5 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
In this Guideline, the word "should” indicates requirements that are expected to apply unless shown to 
not be applicable or unless replaced by an alternative demonstrated to provide at least an equivalent 
level of quality assurance. The scope also includes the following: 
1.2.1 
An active pharmaceutical ingredient is any substance or mixture of substances intended to 
be used in the manufacture or compounding of a medicinal product and/ or that, when used 
during production, becomes an active ingredient of that product intended to exert a 
pharmacological, immunological, or metabolic action functions or to make a medical 
diagnosis.  
1.2.2 
For the purpose of these guidelines, distribution of scheduled substances shall comprise all 
activities consisting of procuring, importing, holding, supplying, of these scheduled 
substances. 
1.2.3 
These guidelines also apply to intermediates (including precursors) of raw materials used to 
produce scheduled substances. 
1.2.4 
Any scheduled substance containing substances listed as specified schedule 5 and schedule 
6 requires a permit in terms of Section 22A (9) or 22A (11) of the Medicines Act.  
2. LEGAL PROVISION 
These guidelines need to be applied in accordance with the relevant legislation applicable to each 
profession engaged in manufacturing and/or compounding of medicines and or related substances. 
Pharmacists (in the manufacturing, wholesaling, and/or compounding sites) and all the support 
personnel are bound by the Pharmacy Act (Act 53 of 1974) and the regulations and rules published in 
terms of that Act. All these personnel are also bound by the regulations and guidelines published in 
terms of the Medicine Act. Holders of a Section 22C(1)(b) licence of the Medicine Act are also subject 
to the Good Pharmacy Practice (GPP) Rules, as stipulated in the Section 22 of the Pharmacy Act. These 
provisions should all be read in conjunction, and not separately. Each instrument may be amended 
from time to time. 
For ease of reference, the key provisions relating to importation and distribution of scheduled 
substances provided in the Medicines Act and the General Regulations published in terms of that Act 
are provided here: 
Section 22C. Licensing. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this section— 
(b) the Authority may, on application in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, 
issue to a medical device or IVD establishment, manufacturer, wholesaler or distributor of a medicine, 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 6 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
Scheduled substance, medical device or IVD a licence to manufacture, import, export, act as a 
wholesaler of or distribute, as the case may be, such medicine, Scheduled substance, medical device or 
IVD upon such conditions as to the application of such acceptable quality assurance principles and 
good manufacturing and distribution practices as the Authority may determine. 
(6) No medical device or IVD establishment, manufacturer, wholesaler, or distributor referred to in 
subsection (1)(b) shall manufacture, act as a wholesaler of or distribute, as the case may be, any 
medicine, Scheduled substance, medical device or IVD unless he or she is the holder of a licence 
contemplated in the said subsection. 
Section 22D. Period of validity and renewal of licence. 
Section 22E. Suspension and cancellation of licence. 
Section 22H. Purchase and sale of medicines, medical devices, IVDs and Scheduled substances by 
wholesalers. 
The relevant Regulations are as follows: 
General Regulation 23- Licence to Manufacture, Import, Export, Act as a Wholesaler of or Distribute 
Medicines or Scheduled Substances 
General Regulation 24- Period of validity and renewal of Licence issued in terms of Regulation 23. 
3. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
All parties involved in the supply chain dealing with the Importation and Distribution of Scheduled 
Substances used in the manufacturing or compounding of medicines and/ or related substances, are 
responsible for the effective, efficient, and safe handling, storage, and distribution of such Scheduled 
Substances in a manner that does not risk exposure to temperatures or any other condition that may 
have an adverse effect on the quality of the product and that it is not stored outside of their 
recommended storage conditions. They must prevent any excursions from the recommended storage 
conditions that could potentially affect the quality, safety, and effectiveness of the scheduled 
substance. 
The principles of Good Manufacturing Practices and Good Wholesaling Practices are equally applicable 
to any Scheduled Substance moving through the supply chain from the manufacturer to the end user, 
as well as Scheduled Substances which are moving backwards in the supply chain because of the return 
or recall thereof. 
The following are important in the guiding principles: 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 7 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
3.1 Quality Management System (QMS) 
Importers and Distributors of scheduled substances should develop and maintain a quality 
management system setting out roles, responsibilities, processes, and risk management principles 
as per the S.A. Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice.  
The Quality Management System (QMS) should be adequately resourced with qualified and 
competent personnel, and suitable and sufficient premises, equipment, and facilities. It should 
ensure that: 
(i) 
Scheduled substances are procured, imported, stored, and distributed in a way that is 
compliant with the requirements of GMP and GWP of these scheduled substances; 
(ii) 
management roles and responsibilities are clearly specified and defined; 
(iii) 
 scheduled substances are delivered to the right recipients within a satisfactory time 
period to avoid compromising their safety, quality, and efficacy; 
(iv) 
records are made contemporaneously and stored for a period of five years as per 
General Regulations 35 and 36 of the Medicine Act; 
(v) 
deviations from established procedures are documented and investigated;  
(vi) 
appropriate corrective and preventive actions, commonly known as ‘CAPA’, are taken to 
correct deviations and prevent them in line with the principles of quality risk 
management;  
(vii) 
changes that may affect the storage and distribution of scheduled substances are 
evaluated. 
Furthermore, the size, the structure and complexity of the Importer and distributor’s activities 
should be taken into consideration when developing or modifying the quality management 
system. 
3.2 Personnel 
1. Importers and Distributors of scheduled substances should employ key personnel as per the 
requirements of the S.A. Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice. 
The Key Personnel include the following: 
a. An Authorised Representative/natural person who resides in South Africa and 
will be responsible to SAHPRA for the compliance with the requirements of the 
Medicines and Related Substances Act,101 of 1965(Act 101 of 1965). 
b. The Responsible Pharmacist who is responsible to SAHPRA for the compliance 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 8 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
with the requirements of the Medicines and Related Substances Act,101 of 
1965(Act 101 of 1965) and to the Pharmacy Council for compliance with the 
requirements of the Pharmacy Act,1974(Act 53 of 1974). 
c. The person responsible for Quality Assurance. This person must be part of the 
decision-making process in all the matters that affect the quality of the 
Scheduled Substance, including its testing, storage, and distribution to the end-
user. 
2. The designated person should fulfil his/her responsibilities personally. The designated person 
can delegate duties but not responsibilities.  
3. The responsibilities of all personnel involved in the importation and distribution of the 
scheduled substances should be specified in writing. The personnel should be trained in the 
requirements of GMP and GWP for scheduled substances. 
4.  They should have the appropriate competence and experience to ensure that scheduled 
substances are properly handled, stored, and distributed. 
5.  The personnel should receive initial and continuing training relevant to their role, based on 
written procedures and in accordance with the written training programme of the company. 
6. A record of all training should be kept, and the effectiveness of training should be 
periodically assessed and documented. 
7. The S.A Guideline on Good Manufacturing Practices further explains the importance of the 
correct qualifications for each role and responsibility in the organization, including the 
training relevant and necessary for that particular role. 
3.3 Documentation 
1. Documentation comprises of all written procedures, instructions, contracts, records, and 
data, in paper or in electronic form. These documents should be readily available or 
retrievable. All documentation related to compliance of the Importer, wholesaler and 
distributor with these guidelines should be made available on request of competent 
authorities. 
2. The documents should be sufficiently comprehensive with respect to the scope of 
Importing, Wholesaling/Storing, and Distributing activities and in a language understood by 
personnel. It should be written in clear, unambiguous language and be free from errors. 
3. Any alteration made in the documentation should be signed and dated; the alteration 
should permit the reading of the original information. Where appropriate, the reason for 
the alteration should be recorded. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 9 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
4. Each employee should have ready access to all necessary documentation for the tasks 
executed. 
Below are some of the documents the Importer, Wholesaler and Distributor of Scheduled 
Substances should have in their premises.  
(i) Procedures 
1. The Importer, Wholesaler/Storer and Distributor’s written procedures should describe all 
the activities which affect the quality of scheduled substances. This could include receipt 
and checking of deliveries, storage, cleaning, and maintenance of the premises (including 
pest control), recording of the storage conditions, security of stocks on site and of 
consignments in transit, withdrawal from saleable stock, handling of returned products, 
recall plans, etc. 
2. These procedures should be approved, signed, and dated by the person(s) responsible for 
the quality management system of the company. 
3. The company should ascertain that only valid and approved procedures are in use. 
Documents should be reviewed regularly and kept up to date. Version control should be 
applied to the procedures. After revision of a document a system should exist to prevent 
inadvertent use of the superseded version. Superseded or obsolete procedures should be 
removed from workstations and archived. The new version should be made available to 
the relevant personnel and training records be updated. 
(ii) Records 
1. All the records should be clear, be made at the time each operation is performed and in 
such a way that all significant activities or events are traceable.  These records should be 
retained for at least 5 years after the expiry date of the scheduled substance batch to 
which they relate. For scheduled substances with retest dates, records should be retained 
for at least 5 years after the batch is completely distributed. 
2. The records of each purchase and sale, showing the date of purchase or supply, name of 
the scheduled substance, batch number and quantity received or supplied, and name and 
address of the supplier and of the original manufacturer, as well as the details of 
customer/client supplied to, if not the same, or of the shipping agent and/or the 
consignee should be kept. These records should ensure the traceability of the origin and 
destination of products, so that all the suppliers of, or those supplied with a scheduled 
substance can be identified. These are some of the records that should be retained (as per 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 10 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
point 1 above) and shall be made available whenever they are requested by the SAHPRA 
Inspectors, or any other legal person authorized by the South African law to do so. The 
records include, but are not limited to the following: 
• 
The identity of original manufacturer 
• 
The address of original manufacturer 
• 
The purchase orders raised (invoice number) 
• 
The bills of lading or transportation documentation (from the Manufacturer) 
• 
The receipt documents. 
• 
The name and/or designation of the scheduled substance. 
• 
The manufacturer’s batch number 
• 
The manufacturer’s expiry date and/or retest date of these scheduled substances 
(which must be justified by stability studies if not included in an ASMF or DMF) 
• 
The transportation and distribution records (from the local company/Importer-
Distributor) 
• 
All valid Certificates of Analysis, including those from the original manufacturer. 
3.4 Premises and Equipment 
1. The premises used for the storage of these scheduled substances should be suitable and 
adequate to ensure proper storage and their distribution. (As per GWP and GMP 
requirements) 
2. The equipment used should provide protection from contamination or cross 
contamination of these scheduled substances, e.g., narcotics, highly sensitive materials, 
materials of high pharmacological activity or toxicity. 
3. The premises should be suitably secure to prevent unauthorised access into the company 
and to monitor all the activities happening within it. 
4.  The premises should have signage with access control for authorized personnel to enter 
relevant spaces. 
5. All the monitoring devices and other equipment used in the facility, that are necessary to 
guarantee the quality attributes of the scheduled substance, should be calibrated 
according to an approved schedule against certified traceable standards. Relevant 
qualification of equipment and validation of processes must be initially performed, 
documented, and repeated based on the agreed plan. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 11 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
3.5 Operations 
A company that Imports, Stores and Distribute a scheduled substance should under its quality 
management system explain all the operations taking place at that particular site as per the GMP 
and GWP principles. These should include (but are not limited) the following:  
(1) 
Orders 
a. The document must clearly state where they procure these scheduled substances, 
that is the name and address of the manufacturer and also explain/state if that 
manufacturer is registered according to that country’s national law(s), per Section 
22H of the Medicine Act. 
b. The manufacturer must also be in possession of a licence/certificate permitting them 
to manufacture as per their country’s national law(s). 
(2) 
Receipt 
a. The document must clearly state how the areas for receiving these scheduled 
substances should protect the deliveries from prevailing weather conditions during 
unloading. Furthermore, these areas should be indicated with appropriate signage 
and the reception area should be separate from the storage areas. The document 
must also state that deliveries should be examined at receipt area in order to verify 
that: 
(i) 
the containers are not damaged; 
(ii) 
all security seals are present with no sign of tampering; 
(iii) 
correct labelling, including correlation between the name used by the 
supplier and the in-house name if these are different;  
(iv) 
necessary information, such as a certificate of analysis, is available; and  
(v) 
the scheduled substances consignment corresponds to the order 
placed by the company. 
(vi) 
the expiry date and retest date (if applicable). 
c. The document must also state that any scheduled substances delivered with broken 
seals, damaged packaging, or suspected of possible contamination should be 
quarantined either physically or using an equivalent electronic system and the cause of 
the issue investigated. 
d. The document must clearly explain how a scheduled substance which requires specific 
storage measures, e.g., narcotics and products requiring a specific storage temperature 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 12 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
or humidity, should be immediately identified, and stored in accordance with written 
instructions and with relevant legislative provisions. 
e. The document must clearly explain how the importer/distributor of a scheduled 
substance handles any of these scheduled substances procured or imported by him 
which is suspected to have been falsified. The company must segregate it either 
physically or using an equivalent electronic system and inform the national competent 
authority of the country in which the company is registered. 
f. The document must clearly explain how rejected materials should be identified, 
controlled, and quarantined to prevent their unauthorised use in manufacturing and 
their further distribution. 
g. Hard and /or soft copy records of destruction activities should be readily available, to 
explain the process to be followed when the consignment is to be destroyed. 
(3) 
Storage 
a. The document must clearly state why scheduled substances should be stored under 
the conditions specified by the manufacturer, e.g., controlled temperature and 
humidity when necessary, and in such a manner to prevent contamination and/or mix-
up. These storage conditions should be monitored, and records maintained. The 
records should be reviewed regularly by the person responsible for the quality 
management system. When specific storage conditions are required, the storage area 
should be qualified and operated within these specified limits. 
b. The document must also state why the storage facilities should be clean and free from 
litter, dust, and pests. It should further explain why adequate precautions should be 
taken against spillage or breakage, attack by micro-organisms and cross-
contamination. 
c. The document must clearly describe the system used by the importer/distributor, and 
this system must ensure stock rotation, e.g., ‘first expiry (retest date), first out’, with 
regular and frequent checks that the system is operating correctly. Any electronic 
warehouse management systems must be validated. The system must be able to 
separate any scheduled substance beyond its expiry date, either physically or using any 
equivalent electronic system, from approved stock and these scheduled substances 
must not be supplied. There must be a contingency plan in place to manage equipment 
failure and power outages, to ensure special storage conditions are maintained at all 
times. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 13 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
d. The document must clearly explain how storage and/or transportation of these 
scheduled substances is handled when these activities are contracted out. The 
company must ensure that the contract acceptor knows and follows the appropriate 
storage and transport conditions (in accordance with recommended storage conditions 
for each substance and these have to be monitored during transportation). The 
document must clearly explain the importance of a written contract between the 
contract giver and contract acceptor, which clearly establishes the duties of each party. 
The contract acceptor should not subcontract any of the work entrusted to him under 
the contract without the contract giver’s written authorisation. 
(4) 
Deliveries to customers 
a. The company must only supply these scheduled substances to registered 
manufacturers/lawfully authorized professionals in accordance with Act 101 of 1965(as 
amended). 
b. These scheduled substances must be transported in accordance with the conditions 
specified by their manufacturer and in a manner that does not adversely affect their 
quality. The product, batch and container identity should be maintained at all times. 
All original container labels should remain readable. 
c. The company must have a system in place by which the distribution of each batch of 
these scheduled substances can be readily identified to permit its recall. 
(5) 
Sharing of information 
The companies that are Importers and Distributors of these scheduled substances must 
develop and maintain documents and systems setting out processes and ways of how to 
share information with their clients and/or national authorities. These documents/or 
systems must be able to address the following concerns: 
a.  How they notify their customers and the national authorities of any information or 
event that they become aware of, which will have the potential to cause an 
interruption to supply. 
b. How they should transfer all product related quality or regulatory information received 
from a scheduled substance manufacturer to the customer/national authority and from 
the customer/national authority to the scheduled substance manufacturer. 
c. How they provide to their scheduled substance customers/national authority the name 
and address of the original scheduled substance manufacturer and the batch number(s) 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 14 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
supplied. Furthermore, the document/system must also state that a copy of the original 
certificate of analysis from the manufacturer should be provided to the 
customer/national authority. The document/system must also explain how the original 
manufacturer can respond to a competent authority directly or through the company. 
(6) 
Detention of Scheduled Substance consignment  
6.1 Consignments/shipments would be detained unless: 
b. The import licence is produced, and it corresponds with the shipping 
documents.  
c. Where an importer delays in providing missing import compliance documents, 
the consignment may be given an extended health detention (EHD), and this 
would require that the scheduled substances be moved to/stored in a SAHPRA 
registered bonded warehouse.  
d. Upon Applicant/Importer furnishing the authority with the relevant 
documents release shall be granted 
6.2 Consignment in-transit, an EHD will be given to the importer, after which an acquittal will 
be send once consignment has landed to the rightful receiver.   
3.6 Returns, Complaints and Recalls 
The company must develop documents/systems on how they handle returns, complaints and 
recalls. These documents/systems must be adequately maintained and be readily accessible 
when required or requested by the authorities. The effectiveness of the system must be 
challenged. 
(1) 
Returns 
a.  Any Scheduled Substance returned to the supplying company must be clearly 
identified as such and quarantined pending investigation. 
b. Any Scheduled Substance which left the care of the supplying company, should only be 
returned back to approved stock if all of the following conditions are met: 
(i) 
The scheduled substance is in its original unopened container(s) with all original 
security seals present and is in good condition; 
(ii) 
the company returning the stock can demonstrate that the scheduled 
substance has been stored and handled under proper required storage 
conditions. Written information provided by the customer should be available 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 15 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
for this purpose; 
(iii) 
the remaining shelf-life period of the scheduled substance is acceptable; 
(iv) 
the scheduled substance has been examined and assessed by a person trained 
and authorised to do so; (This assessment should take into account the nature 
of the scheduled substance, any special storage conditions it requires, and the 
time elapsed since it was supplied. As necessary and if there is any doubt about 
the quality of the returned scheduled substance, advice should be sought from 
the manufacturer.) 
(v) 
that no loss of information/traceability has occurred during the time it was 
supplied to the returning company. 
c. The company must create and maintain records of all the returned scheduled 
substances. This record/documentation must include the following: 
(i) 
the name and address of the customer/client returning the scheduled 
substances; 
(ii) 
the name or designation of the scheduled, its batch number and quantity 
returned; 
(iii) 
 the reason for return which must be clearly stated/documented; 
(iv) 
the return to stock for use or disposal of the returned scheduled substance and 
records of the assessment performed. 
d. The company’s documentation must clearly state that only appropriately trained and 
authorised personnel should release scheduled substances for return to stock. Any 
scheduled substances returned to saleable stock must be placed such that the stock 
rotation system operates effectively. 
(2) 
Complaints 
The company must have a system/record of all the complaints they receive, whether 
received orally or in writing. These complaints must be recorded and investigated 
according to a written and approved procedure of the company. If a complaint is about 
the quality of a scheduled substance, the Importer/Distributor must refer the complaint 
to the original manufacturer of the scheduled substance for them to review the 
complaint. This will help the manufacturer in order to determine whether any further 
action, either with other customers who may have received this scheduled substance or 
with the competent authority, or both, should be initiated. The investigation into the 
cause for the complaint must be conducted and documented by the appropriate party. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 16 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
a. The complaints records must include (but not limited to) the following: 
(i) 
the name and address of complainant (these must be kept confidential in 
case the complainant wants to remain anonymous); 
(ii) 
the name, surname, title (where appropriate), and phone number of person 
submitting the complaint; 
(iii) 
the nature of the complaint, including name and batch number of the 
scheduled substance; 
(iv) 
the date on which the complaint was received; 
(v) 
the initially action taken, including dates and identity of person taking the 
action; 
(vi) 
the date of any follow-up action taken, including the identity of the person 
taking the action; 
(vii) 
the response provided to the originator of complaint, including the response 
date; 
(viii) 
any final decision(outcome) on the status of the scheduled substance batch. 
b. The records of complaints must be retained in order to evaluate trends, product-
related frequencies, and severity with a view to taking additional, and if appropriate, 
immediate corrective action. These must also be made available during inspections by 
competent authorities. 
c. Where a complaint is referred to the original scheduled substance manufacturer, the 
record maintained by the Importer/distributor should include any response received 
from the original scheduled substance manufacturer, including date and information 
provided. 
d. In the event of a serious or potentially life-threatening situation, local, national, and/or 
international authorities must be informed, and their advice sought. 
(3) 
Recalls 
a. If the situation warrants, that is, after the Importers/ distributors and pharmaceutical 
products manufacturers have reviewed the complaint with the original scheduled 
substance manufacturer and it is determined that further action is necessary, either 
with other customers who may have received this scheduled substance or with the 
regulatory authority (locally, nationally and/or internationally), a recall of this 
scheduled substance should be initiated. The investigation into the cause of the 
complaint or recall should be conducted and documented by the appropriate party. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 17 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
b. Every company handling scheduled substances must have a written procedure that 
defines the circumstances under which a recall of a scheduled substance should be 
considered. 
c. This recall procedure must designate who should be involved in evaluating the 
information, how a recall should be initiated, who should be informed about the recall, 
and how the recalled material should be treated. The designated person (as per the 
company’s organogram/QMS) should be involved in recalls. 
4. WHO MUST APPLY FOR A LICENCE TO IMPORT AND DISTRIBUTE SCHEDULED 
SUBSTANCES (INCLUDING CONTROLLED SCHEDULED SUBSTANCES) 
4.1 Persons who in the course of a business are engaged in: 
(a) importing scheduled substances. 
(b) distribution of scheduled substances used in the manufacturing or compounding of 
medicines for human and animal use. 
5. 
HOW TO OBTAIN A LICENCE (APPLICATION FORM AND ADDITIONAL 
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED). 
5.1 Standard application form for an Importer and Distributor of Scheduled Substances licence is 
available from The Office of the Chief Executive Officer of SAHPRA or from the SAHPRA 
website:https://www.sahpra.org.za/inspectorate-pharmalicencing-and-regulatory-
compliance/ 
5.2 An application for an Importer and Distributor of Scheduled Substances should be 
accompanied by the prescribed application fee (see the gazetted published fees on the 
SAHPRA website) and in the case of a new Importer and Distributor Licence for Scheduled 
Substances an additional inspection fee will be required as per the SAHPRA gazetted fees 
published in the SAHPRA website.   
5.3 The applicant shall provide within the application form acceptable documentation proof 
obtained from the following institutions: 
5.3.1 
The SA Pharmacy Council, namely: 
• 
the particulars of the owner of the business which includes the Certificate of 
recording of a Pharmacy Owner 
• 
the registration of the responsible pharmacist 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 18 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
• 
Certificate of recording of a Pharmacy. 
5.3.2 
The Director General of Health, namely: 
• 
a licence for the premises (NDOH Licence) wherein or from which such business carried 
on/or proof of application. 
5.3.3 
The Additional documents required: 
• 
Cover Letter -Which explains the reason for the application and type, i.e., whether it 
is a NEW/RENEWAL/AMENDMENT application. 
• 
CIPC/CIPRO/DTI CERTIFICATES OR DOCUMENTS proving ownership of the business.  
• 
Proof of licence application payment 
• 
The List of Imported and Distributed Scheduled Substances 
• 
The List of Lawfully authorised/Licensed facilities and professionals. 
5.4 The application form for an Importer and Distributor of Scheduled Substances should include 
the qualification of staff who handle the importation and distribution of these scheduled 
substances and a documentary proof of the company’s ability to comply with good 
manufacturing practices (GMP) and good wholesaling practices (GWP) /or proof of the 
compliance with GMP/GWP as determined by SAHPRA. 
5.5 The applicant should include a Site Master File (SMF) on the application form. This must contain 
specific and factual information about all the operations to be carried out at that site(facility).  
Guidance on what information should be included in the SMF can be obtained on request from 
the Office of the Chief Executive Officer of SAHPRA or the SAHPRA website www.sahpra.org.za 
The SMF, attached to the application form should include: 
• 
A copy of the local area plan of the location of the business premises indicating all 
adjacent properties and the nature of the business being carried out on such 
premises. 
• 
A floor plan of the building in which the business premises are situated. 
• 
A plan of the actual layout of the business premises 
• 
An inventory of equipment to be used in conducting the business. 
• 
A manual of procedures and practices to be implemented to ensure the safety, 
efficacy, and quality of the scheduled substance to be Imported or distributed.  
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 19 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
5.6 The application for an Importer and Distributor of scheduled substances should specify the 
scheduled substance to be imported and distributed by the applicant. 
5.7 The Authority (SAHPRA) will only issue the licence to import and distribute scheduled 
substances, when it is satisfied that all the requirements as stipulated in the Act 101 of 1965 
as amended and its General Regulations together with all the applicable guidelines, have been 
complied with. Furthermore, a site inspection must be done/carried out to ascertain the 
accuracy and compliance to the legislative requirements. 
5.8 Where appropriate, SAHPRA may refuse to grant a licence. In such cases the CEO of SAHPRA 
will notify the applicant to furnish The Authority with such additional documentation or 
information as The Authority may require. The notification will set out the reason for the 
proposal and give the applicant a reasonable period to respond. The applicant may make 
written representations. Before making a final decision on its proposal The Authority will take 
the applicant’s written representation into consideration. 
6. 
INSPECTION (AS STIPULATED IN REGULATION 23(3) OF THE GENERAL 
REGULATIONS TO ACT 101 OF 1965) 
6.1 The Program 3: Inspectorate and Regulatory Compliance Units carry out regular and repeated 
inspection of sites Importing and Distributing Scheduled Substances both in South Africa and 
in countries with which SAHPRA does not have a Mutual Recognition Agreement.  The 
Inspection enables the Inspectorate Unit to confirm that licence holders are complying with 
the conditions of their licence, with the provisions of the Medicines Act and with Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and Good Wholesaling Practice (GWP). 
6.2 These Inspectors are also empowered by Section 28 of the Medicine Act to amongst other 
things: 
(a) 
enter any place or premises from which:  
• 
The holder of a licence to import and distribute scheduled substances conducts 
business from within  
• 
The holder of a certificate who Imports and/or distributes controlled scheduled 
substances during the course of conducting their business. 
(b) 
inspect the premises used in the importation, storage, and distribution of scheduled 
substances, and inspect any documentation or records relating to the importation,  
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 20 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
storage and distribution of these scheduled substances. 
(c) 
take samples of any scheduled substance for the purpose of testing or analysis 
(d) 
seize any book, record, documentation for any scheduled substance handled by that 
site. 
It is required by legislation that licence holders shall make their premises available for 
inspection by the Inspectorate at any reasonable time. 
6.3 Following an inspection, the Inspector prepares a report of his/her findings. A report is then 
sent to the licence applicant or holder of a licence, noting any deficiencies found and asking 
for proposals to remedy them.  In the event of serious non-compliance with GMP and/or 
GWP, the report is referred to SAHPRA for formal action, which can include the refusal, 
suspension or revoking of a licence, or part of a licence. 
6.4 Where quality control testing of the scheduled substance is contracted to a third party, the 
testing site should also be made available for inspection and should also obtain a licence 
authorizing it to test the scheduled substances and any other related substances. 
7. 
POWER TO SUSPEND OR REVOKE A LICENCE TO IMPORT AND DISTRIBUTE A 
SCHEDULED SUBSTANCE (AS PER PROVISION OF SECTION 22E OF ACT 101). 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 21 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
7.1 SAHPRA (The Authority) may revoke, amend, or suspend a licence when statutory conditions 
of that licence are no longer being met.  The Authority will give the licence holder notice of its 
proposal and set out the reasons.  In most cases the licence holder will be given a period of 
not less than 20 days to respond.  The licence holder may give notice to the Authority of 
his/her desire to be heard or make written representation to the Authority with respect to 
the proposals. 
7.2 Where it appears to SAHPRA that public safety is at risk, SAHPRA may suspend a licence with 
immediate effect for such a period as SAHPRA may determine or revoke the licence in 
question. 
7.3 The provisions of a Licence may be varied based on the application submitted by the licence 
holder. 
7.4 A licence holder or applicant may at any time within the period of 30 days from the date on 
which the decision is served on him/her appeal to the Minister to question the validity of 
SAHPRA’s decision. 
8. 
FEES PAYABLE 
8.1 The Medicines and Related Substances Act 101 of 1965 introduced provisions in terms of 
Section35(1)(xxxi) and(xxxii) read together with Section35(4) for the payment of fees for licences, 
certificates, and inspections. The current fees legislation for medicines and scheduled substances 
is contained in the Medicines Regulations as amended. 
8.2 The fees which are currently payable are the following: 
(a) 
Licence applications (new and amendment applications) 
(b) 
Licence renewal 
(c) 
Licence issue 
(d) 
Performance of an inspection 
An applicable annual fee also known as the licence retention fee, is also payable during the 
currency of a licence. 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 22 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
8.3 A schedule of the current fees is available from the Office of the Chief Executive Officer of 
SAHPRA or on the SAHPRA website at www.sahpra.org.za 
8.4 When SAHPRA plans to make changes to the amount or frequency of fees. Licence holders are 
consulted and given the opportunity to comment on the new fee proposals. Details of the 
new fees are published in the government gazette and on the South African Health Products 
Regulatory Authority’s website at www.sahpra.org.za  
8.5 Application fees are non-refundable regardless of the outcome of the application (including 
rejection, non-approval, unresolved or failure to respond to query rounds).  
NB: During administrative screening and technical evaluation, the licensing unit may issue 
requests for additional information or clarification where deficiencies are identified. The unit 
may allow up to two (2) rounds of queries, at its discretion. Applicants are required to submit 
complete, accurate and satisfactory responses to each query within the timelines specified. 
Where deficiencies remain unresolved after the permitted query rounds, the application may 
not be recommended for approval, and the review process may be terminated. 
9. 
APPLICATION PROCESSING TIMELINES 
9.1 The licensing unit aims to: 
(a) Acknowledge receipt of applications which meet the minimum requirements within 2 
business days.  
(b) Finalise New Applications within 160 business days.  
(c) Finalise Renewal Applications: within 30 business days (reliant on provision of a valid 
resolution letter by the company)  
NB: Renewal applications must be submitted at least 180 days prior to the expiry of the 
licence.  
(d) Amendment Applications: within 30 business days (for administrative and technical 
amendments not requiring an inspection)  
(e) NB: Technical amendments may warrant an inspection, incurring additional time to finalise 
the application (Refer to guideline SAHPGL-LIC-03: Guideline on How to Amend a Current 
Licence). 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 23 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
(f) Timelines for the processing and finalization of licensing applications are measured solely 
on the time which an application is under active review by SAHPRA.  
NB: Time during which an application is with a company (including periods awaiting 
responses, corrective actions or readiness for an inspection) will be excluded. 
9.2 Inspection scheduling and conduct: 
(a) New applicants are encouraged to request a pre-submission engagement with the SAHPRA 
Pharma Licensing and Inspectorate units prior to submission of a licence application. The 
purpose of this engagement is to facilitate alignment on inspection readiness and the 
appropriate timing for submission of a licence application. 
(b) Proposed date of inspection: when proposing an inspection date with the application, the 
applicant must consider that: 
i. 
Inspections are conducted once the company deems itself ready for an inspection. 
ii. Inspections are planned a quarter in advance. 
(c) Where an applicant is not inspection-ready on the agreed inspection date, the licence 
application may be rejected. Fees associated with rejected and refused applications are 
non-refundable. 
(d) he licensing unit aims to provide a regulatory decision within 30 business days after 
receiving an inspection resolution letter. 
10. 
CONTACT DETAILS 
SAHPRA and Programme 3(Inspectorate and Regulatory Compliance) can be contacted at: 
The Office of the Chief Executive Office 
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
Private Bag X828 
Pretoria 
0001 
Tel: 012 501 0300 
Email: enquiries@sahpra.org.za  
Refer to SAHPRA website: https://www.sahpra.org.za/key-contacts/ and 
https://www.sahpra.org.za/inspectorate-and-regulatory-compliance/ 
SAHPGL-LIC-05_v2 
Page 24 of 24
GWP Guideline for Importers and Distributors of Scheduled Substances 
 
10 April 2026 
 
 
 
11. REFERENCES 
The following related documents are referenced: 
Related Legislation  
• 
The Pharmacy Act 53 of 1974 as amended 
• 
Medicines and Related Substances Act 101 of 1965 as amended 
• 
General Regulations of the Medicines and Related Substances Act 101 of 1965 as amended 
Other related documents 
• 
The WHO Import Processes- Annex 5 (Guideline on Import Procedures for medicinal products) 
• 
The PICS Guidelines on Good Distribution Practices for API’s 
• 
SAHPRA Guideline on Good Wholesaling Practices for Wholesalers 
12. VALIDITY  
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision. It will be reviewed on 
this timeframe or as and when required. 
