 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 1 
 
Document Name 
01 Feb 2021 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH 
PRODUCTS 
 
                                                                                              June 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
Document History 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Version 
Date 
Reason for amendment 
Version 1 
30 10 2021 
New Guideline - Incorporation of 
Industry Comments – alignment 
to Act and Regulations 
Version 2 
06 06 2022 
Update to new template 
Change from document number 
5.16 to SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 
This document has been prepared to serve as a guidance document regarding SAHPRA requirements 
for advertisement of medicines and health products- Regulatory Compliance Unit. 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 2 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
 
Contents 
List of abbreviations and definitions .......................................................................................... 3 
1. 
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 6 
2. 
Background .................................................................................................................. 6 
3. 
Scope ......................................................................................................................... 6 
4. 
Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 8 
5. 
Requirements ........................................................................................................... 8 
5.1 
General Requirements............................................................................................. 8 
5.2 
For Scheduled Medicines ....................................................................................... 9 
 
 
 
 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 3 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
 
List of abbreviations and definitions 
Advertisement  
 
in relation to any medicine, scheduled substance product; 
medical device or IVD, means any written, pictorial, visual 
or other descriptive matter or verbal statement or 
reference— 
(a) 
appearing in any newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, 
electronic media (including radio television or other 
publication; 
(b) 
distributed to members of the public; or 
(c) 
brought to the notice of members of the public in 
any manner whatsoever, which is intended to promote the 
sale of that medicine, Scheduled substance, medical 
device or IVD, and ‘advertise’ has a corresponding 
meaning; 
Authority or SAHPRA 
 
means South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
Claims 
 
means any representation which states, suggests or 
implies that a product has particular qualities relating to its 
origin, properties, nature, processing, composition, safety 
or efficacy or any other quality as well as health-related 
claims. Justification in respect of any claim shall be in the 
light of current scientific knowledge 
Complementary medicine 
means any substance or mixture of substances that – (a) 
originates from plants, fungi, algae, seaweeds, lichens, 
minerals, animals or other substance   as determined by 
the Authority;  
     (b) is used or purporting to be suitable for use or 
manufactured or sold for use – 
       (i) in maintaining, complementing or assisting the 
physical or mental state; or  
      (ii) to diagnose, treat, mitigate, modify, alleviate or 
prevent disease or illness or the symptoms   
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 4 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
                 or signs thereof or abnormal physical or mental 
state of a human being or animal; and  
  (c) is used-  
       (i) as a health supplement; or  
      (ii) in accordance with those disciplines as determined 
by the Authority;   
Health product 
means Medicines (including orthodox, all complementary 
products including herbal and homoeopathic), veterinary 
medicines. 
Health supplement 
means any substance, extract or mixture of substances as 
determined by the Authority, sold in dosage forms used or 
purported for use in restoring, correcting or modifying any 
physical or mental state by-    (a) complementing health; 
         (b) supplementing the diet; or  
         (c) a nutritional effect, and excludes injectable 
preparations, medicines or substances listed as               
Schedule 1 or higher in the Act; 
Label 
when used as a verb, means brand, mark or otherwise 
designate or describe, and when used as a noun, means 
any brand or mark or any written, pictorial or other 
descriptive matter appearing on or attached to or packed 
with and referring to any article or the package containing 
any article; 
Medicine 
Includes (a) means any substance or mixture of substances 
used or purporting to be suitable for use or manufactured or 
sold for use in— 
  (i)  the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, modification or 
prevention of disease,  abnormal physical or mental state 
or the symptoms thereof in humans; or 
 (ii) restoring, correcting or modifying any somatic or 
psychic or organic function in humans, and  
(b) includes any veterinary medicine;  
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 5 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
Medical device or IVD 
establishment 
means a facility used by a manufacturer, wholesaler, 
distributor retailer, service provider or an importer of 
medical devices or IVDs for conducting business; 
Package 
means anything in or by which any medicine or Scheduled 
substance is enclosed, covered, contained or packed 
Scheduled substance 
means any medicine or other substance prescribed by the 
Minister under section 22A; 
Sell 
means sell by wholesale or retail and includes import, offer, 
advertise, keep, expose, transmit, consign, convey or 
deliver for sale or authorize, direct or allow a sale or 
prepare or possess for purposes of sale, and barter or 
exchange or supply or otherwise dispose of to any person 
whether for a consideration or otherwise; and 'sale' and 
'sold' have corresponding meanings. 
Veterinary medicine 
means any substance or mixture of substances, other than 
a stock remedy or farm feed to be registered in terms of the 
Fertilizers, Farm Feeds, Agricultural Remedies and Stock 
Remedies Act, 1947 (Act 36 of 1947), used or purporting to 
be suitable for use or manufactured or sold for use in 
connection with vertebrates, for the treatment, diagnosis, 
prevention or cure of any disease, infection or other 
unhealthy condition, or for the maintenance or improvement 
of health, growth, production or working capacity, or for 
curing, correcting or modifying any somatic or organic 
function, or for correcting or modifying behaviour. 
 
 
 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 6 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (hereinafter referred to as the “SAHPRA 
or Authority”) is a statutory body established to provide for the monitoring, evaluation, regulation, 
investigation, inspection, registration and control of medicines, Scheduled substances, clinical 
trials and medical devices, IVDs and related matters in the public interest according to section 2A 
of the Medicines and Related Substances Act,( Act 101 of 1965) as amended (the Medicines Act). 
The Authority must ensure health products registered or authorised by the Authority, during the 
entire life cycle, comply with the information that has been evaluated and approved by the 
Authority through section 2B(1)(c) of the Act.  
The Regulatory Compliance Unit is responsible to ensure that advertising and marketing of 
medicines shall be in compliance with the medicines Act and its general regulations. Inappropriate 
promotion and advertisement of medicines may contribute to the irrational or incorrect use of 
medicinal products. The impact of accurate and science‐based promotional activities is related to 
the existence of trustworthy and accessible information sources and the level of medical 
knowledge of the population. Hence, the control of promotion and advertisement of medical 
products is necessary and should be consistent with the Medicines Act and the general 
regulations. 
2. Background 
Advertising is important to inform the public of medicine available to treat different ailments. This 
marketing tool that business especially medicine manufacture and their agent should utilised. 
However, there is need of guideline in terms of Medicine act in which medicines can advertise 
directly to public which should not, furthermore, how to advertise different scheduled medicines. 
3. Scope 
3.1 This guideline applies to requirements for advertisement of medicines and health 
products. 
3.2 This guideline is informed by the provisions of the Medicines Act and its regulations as 
follows: 
3.2.3 Section 19 (1) of the Medicines Act states that: No person shall sell any 
medicine, unless it complies with the prescribed requirements. Therefore, any 
person who contravenes provision of this sub-section shall be guilty of an 
offence. 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 7 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
3.2.4 In terms of section 14 of the Medicines Act the sale of medicines, medical 
devices or IVDs which are subject to registration and are not registered is 
prohibited.  
3.2.5 Section 18 of the Medicines Act provides that: 
3.2.5.1 No person shall sell any 
a) Medicine or Scheduled substance unless the immediate 
container or the package in which that medicine or Scheduled 
substance is sold bears a label stating the prescribed particulars; 
and 
b) medical device or IVD unless the medical device or IVD, or its 
packaging, bears a label, where practical stating the prescribed 
particulars  
3.2.5.2 No person shall advertise any medicine or Scheduled substance, 
medical device or IVD for sale unless such advertisement complies 
with the prescribed requirements 
3.2.5.3 The label referred to in subsection (1) shall be approved by the 
Authority. 
3.2.5.4 The Authority may authorize a deviation from the prescribed format 
and contents of any label. 
3.2.5.5 The Minister may prescribe additional requirements for the labeling 
of medicines, medical devices or IVDs. Therefore, any person who 
contravenes provisions of these section shall be guilty of an offence. 
3.3 Section 22E of the Medicines Act describes reasons for the suspension and cancellation 
of a licence issued under Section 22C, 
3.4 Section 29 of the Medicines Act describes Offences for failure to comply with the 
provisions of the Act, and Section 30 of the Medicines Act provides for penalties when an 
offence has been committed. 
3.5 In terms of Regulation 42 (4) of the General Regulations, No advertisement for a medicine 
may contain a statement which deviates from, is in conflict with or goes beyond the 
evidence submitted in the application for registration of such medicine with regard to its 
safety, quality or efficacy where such evidence has been accepted by the Authority in 
respect of such medicine and incorporated into the approved professional information of 
such medicine. 
3.6 Regulation 52 of the General Regulations provides that   Any person who fails to comply 
with, contravenes the provisions of or furnishes incorrect information, as the case may 
be, in respect of-regulations 42 with regard to the advertising of medicines. 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 8 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
3.7 Section 18B of the Medicines Act relates to Sampling of medicines, medical devices or 
IVDs, and provides that 
3.7.1 No person shall sample any medicine, medical device or IVD 
3.7.2 Use of medicine, medical devices or IVDs for exhibition or appraisal purposes 
shall be as prescribed. 
3.7.3 For the purposes of this section ‘sample’ means the free supply of medicine, 
medical devices or IVDs by a device or IVD establishment, manufacturer or 
wholesaler or its agent to a pharmacist, medical practitioner, dentist, 
veterinarian, practitioner, nurse or other person registered under the Health 
Professions Act, 1974 (Act No. 56 of 1974), or any professional or person 
authorized to use the device. 
4. Purpose 
The Guideline outline requirements that are key principles for any advertisement of any 
scheduled medicines.  The Advertisement content cannot deviate from the evidence submitted 
in the application for registration of medicines 
5. Requirements  
 
5.1 General Requirements 
5.1.1 No person or media shall advertise any scheduled medicines unless the 
product is registered with the Authority. 
5.1.2 No person or media shall advertise any registered product that has undergone 
some variation and the amendment has not been approved by the Authority. 
5.1.3 An advertisement shall be accurate, complete, clear and designed to promote 
credibility and trust by the general public and health practitioners. Statements 
or illustrations must not mislead directly or by implication. 
5.1.4 No advertisement shall bring the respective industry into disrepute, undermine 
confidence in advertising or prejudice public confidence in the product. 
5.1.5 No advertisement shall disparage any product of a competitor, either directly or 
by implication. 
5.1.6 No advertisement shall imitate the general layout, text, slogans or visual 
presentation or devices of other advertisements from other companies in a way 
likely to mislead, deceive or confuse the consumer and / or health practitioners.. 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 9 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
5.1.7 No advertisement shall be framed in such a manner as to exploit the 
superstitious belief and/or induce fear in the consumer to purchase the product. 
No advertisement shall contain words such as magic, miracle or mystical; 
exotic descriptions, such as “super potency” or such other words as to induce 
the daily and continuous use of the product. 
5.2 For Scheduled Medicines  
5.2.1 Medicines which contain a Schedule 0 substance or a substance listed as 
Schedule 1 may be advertised to the public. 
5.2.2 Medicines which contain a substance listed as Schedule 2, Schedule 3, 
Schedule 4, Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 may be advertised: 
5.2.2.1 only for the information of pharmacists, medical practitioners, dentists, 
veterinarians, practitioners, and other authorised prescribers;  
5.2.2.2 in a publication which is normally or only made available to persons 
referred to in paragraph (1).  
5.2.2.3 Shall not be so construed as to prohibit informing the public of the 
prices, names, pack sizes and strengths of medicines which contain a 
substance appearing in Schedule 2, Schedule 3, Schedule 4, Schedule 
5 or Schedule 6 provided that no inference is made to the registered 
indication. 
5.2.3 No advertisement for a medicine may contain a statement which deviates from, 
is in conflict with or goes beyond the evidence submitted in the application for 
registration of such medicine with regard to its safety, quality or efficacy where 
such evidence has been accepted by the Authority in respect of such medicine 
and incorporated into the approved professional information of such medicine. 
5.2.4 An advertisement for a medicine shall contain – 
a) 
the proprietary name of such medicine; 
b) 
 in the case of a written advertisement- 
i. 
the approved name and quantity of each active ingredient of such 
medicine in lettering having minimum legibility must be in accordance 
with approval  
ii. 
of a registered medicine, the registration number allocated to it in 
terms of section 15(5) of the Act; 
 SAHPGL-INSP-RC-07 Guidelines for advertisement of medicines and health products _June 2022 Version 2 
Page 10 
GUIDELINES FOR ADVERTISEMENT OF MEDICINES AND HEALTH PRODUCTS 
June 2022 
 
 
iii. 
of a medicine in respect of which an application for registration has 
been submitted in terms of section 14 of the Act, the reference number 
allocated to such application by the Authority, followed by the words 
"Act 101 /1965 ";and  
iv. 
where a name other than the proprietary name is also used, such other 
name shall be in lettering one half the size of the largest type size in 
which the proprietary name appears in such advertisement; and 
a. in the case of a  
i. 
veterinary medicine, an indication that the medicine is for 
veterinary use; 
ii. And in the case of a complementary medicine - 
• a statement identifying the discipline of the medicine where 
relevant; 
• an indication that the medicine must be used in accordance 
with the applicable complementary discipline and principles 
where relevant; and 
• if the medicine has not received registration with the 
Authority the following disclaimer: 
 
"This unregistered medicine has not been evaluated by 
the SAHPRA for its quality, safety or intended use. "; 
5.2.5 In the case of an advertisement for a medicine which contains more than one 
active ingredient, no specific reference shall be made to the specific properties 
of any individual active ingredient unless a reference of this nature has been 
approved by the Authority for inclusion in the professional information of such 
medicine. 
5.2.6 
When a medicine is advertised verbally for the first time to persons 
contemplated to in point 5.3.2(a), written information, which shall include at 
least the information referred to in regulation 11(professional information for 
medicines for human use) or regulation 14 ( professional information for 
veterinary medicines) of the general regulations of the Medicines Act, shall 
simultaneously be given to the person to whom the oral advertisement is 
directed, and when the medicine is advertised orally on subsequent occasions 
such information shall be available on request. 
