SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 1 of 25
18 September 2022
GUIDELINE POST IMPORTATION TESTING
The objective of this procedure is to define the process to be followed and to provide instruction to the Holder of the
Certificate of Registration (HCR) when submitting application for Post-Importation Testing Exemption of imported
products.
To ensure that the integrity of imported products is not compromised during transit.
To confirm the imported product’s integrity prior to release for sale in South Africa.
Document History
Final
Version
Reason for Amendment
Effective Date
1
First issue and published for implementation
December2003
2
Second revision and published for implementation
March 2017
3
Third revision and published for implementation
January 2021
4
General update to include Biological/ Biosimilar Products, finalised and
published for implementation
April 2022
5
−
Content structured on the latest SAHPRA Guideline Template
−
Old guideline number 2.04 changed to SAHPGL-INSP-01
September 2022
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 2 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
Contents
Document History............................................................................................................................................ 1
Glossary............................................................................................................................................................3
1.
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................................ 5
1.2 Purpose.................................................................................................................................................... 5
1.3 Scope........................................................................................................................................................ 5
2.
LEGAL PROVISION.....................................................................................................................................6
3.
POST IMPORTATION EXEMPTIONS (PITE’s)...............................................................................................7
4.
GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING OF TRANSPORT...................................................................................... 8
5.
PRODUCT QUALITY PORTOFOLIO........................................................................................................... 10
6.
FEES........................................................................................................................................................ 12
7.
SUBMISSION...........................................................................................................................................12
8.
POST IMPORTATION EXEMPTION GRANTED...........................................................................................13
9.
CONDITIONS OF EXEMPTION................................................................................................................. 14
10. PRODUCT RELEASE TO MARKET............................................................................................................. 15
11. REFERENCES........................................................................................................................................... 16
12. VALIDITY................................................................................................................................................. 16
13. ATTACHMENTS........................................................................................................................................17
13.1 Attachment 1: Application Template for PITE........................................................................................ 17
13.2 Attachment 2: Evidence to support Product Quality Portfolio................................................................18
13.3 Attachment 3: Summary of data: transportation of product..................................................................20
13.4 Attachment 4: An Example of Master Release Document (MRD)...........................................................21
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 3 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
Glossary
Abbreviation/ Term
Meaning
ALCOA
A commonly used acronym for “attributable, legible, contemporaneous,
original and accurate”
ALCOA +
A commonly used acronym for “attributable, legible, contemporaneous,
original and accurate”, which puts additional emphasis on the attributes of
being complete, consistent, enduring and available
AMT
Analytical Method Transfer
AMV
Analytical Method Verification
APQR
Annual Product Quality Review
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
CTD
Common Technical Document
COA
Certificate of Analysis
CRO
Chief Regulatory Officer
FPRC
Finished Product Release Control
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
GRN
Goods Received Note
HCR
Holder of Certificate of Registration also referred to as the “Applicant”
MOA
Memorandum of Agreement
MOU
Memorandum of Understanding
MRA
Mutual Recognition Agreement
MRD
Master Release Document
MBR1
Medisyne Beheer Raad
MRF1
Medicines Registration Form
PI
Professional Information
PIC/S
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention
Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-Operation Scheme
PIL
Patient Information Leaflet
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 4 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
PIT
Post Importation Testing
PITE
Post Importation Testing Exemption
PQP
Product Quality Portfolio
RH
Relative Humidity
RP
Responsible Pharmacist
RP-HPLC
Reverse Phase High-performance liquid chromatography
RRA
Recognized Regulatory Authority
SAHPRA
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
UV/VIS
Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 5 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
1.
INTRODUCTION
Meeting SAHPRA mandate on assuring Public health, the various processes that are implemented, demand that
pharmaceutical products should not be treated in the same way as ordinary commodities. Their manufacturing
and subsequent handling within the supply chain, both nationally and internationally, must conform to
prescribed standards and be rigorously controlled. These precautions serve to assure that patients receive high
standard quality of medicines and to prevent the infiltration of substandard and suspected falsified medicine into
the supply system. The integrity of imported pharmaceutical products could be compromised at various stages
during the life cycle. The market infiltration by substandard and suspected falsified medicines poses different
hazards for public health and processes to ensure SAHPRA’s mandate is deemed crucial to ensure high-quality
medicines to patients. Counterfeit and substandard medicines are a risk to public health as they are often not
effective and so do not benefit patients and can also actively harm patients, even causing death. Serialisation in
the pharmaceutical industry is one of the best tools companies could use to combat counterfeit medicines. It is
therefore the responsibility of the Applicant to confirm the imported pharmaceutical products integrity prior to
release for sale in South Africa.
The guideline also includes a departure from the traditional reactive control system to a risk-based and pro-
active approach under validated control and surveillance systems. The risk-based surveillance system which
could include routine pre-release checks performed by applicants, routine post importation testing and market
signals could identify risks and define the controls that will protect patients from substandard, falsified and
unregulated medicines. This when added together, will assure not only the quality, but also the safety and
efficacy of pharmaceutical products manufactured and distributed. Applicants and manufacturers must have
robust quality management systems in place to ensure that the products that they place onto the market are
safe, of good quality and efficacious.
1.2
Purpose
To ensure that the integrity of imported products are not compromised during transit from source site to the
patient. It is therefore important that the HCR confirms the imported product’s integrity prior to release for
sale in South Africa. In terms of Regulation 53 (1) of Act 101 of 1965, this is done by:
•
Identification and assay, and/or other applicable tests performed locally on the final product. Or
•
Return of samples to overseas testing laboratories or the manufacturers that supplies the product, for
identification and assay and/or other applicable testing.
1.3
Scope
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 6 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
This guideline applies to the following pharmaceutical products:
a)
Category A = Medicines which are intended for use in humans and which are, without manipulation,
ready for administration, including packaged preparations where only a vehicle is added to the
effective medicine;
b)
Category B = Medicines intended for use in humans and animals which cannot normally be
administered without further manipulation;
c)
Category C = Medicines intended for veterinary use which are, without further manipulation, ready for
administration, including packaged preparations where only a vehicle is added to the effective
medicine; and
d)
Category D = Complementary medicines intended for use in humans and animals which are, without
further manipulation, ready for administration, including packaged preparations where only a vehicle
is added to the effective medicine.
2.
LEGAL PROVISION
This guideline provides the framework of where SAHPRA systems are at this point. The default position of
SAHPRA remains Post Importation testing and the guideline features that process as well as the process for
exemption from this if the requirements are met. SAHPRA acknowledges that the system outlined herein is not
static and we will be moving to a scenario where the Post Market surveillance processes will be strengthened and
that SAHPRA endeavors to strengthen the partnership with other recognized Regulatory Authorities through a
process of Memorandums of Agreements. This will enable us to leverage these systems to constantly review this
guideline and move towards a system based on elimination of post importation controls as we have them at
moment.
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit, have submitted or is the
current Holder of the Certificate of Registration applications for the registration of medicines. The integrity of
imported products could be compromised during the life cycle of the product including during transit both from
source site and to patient. According to Regulation 53 of Act 101 of 1965 Subregulation (1) Every medicine must
continue to comply with the standards and specifications which were furnished to the Authority and which have
been accepted by the Authority regarding such medicine. (2) Any proposed deviation from accepted standards
and specifications referred to in subregulation (3) must be submitted to the Authority for prior approval as
determined by the Authority and such deviation must not be introduced before the said approval has been
granted. Therefore, as has been the accepted standard to comply with Regulation 53, the applicant confirms the
imported product’s integrity prior to release for sale in South Africa, by testing conducted post importation. This
is performed by: Qualitative (Identification) and quantitative (assay), and other performed locally on the final
product or Returning of the samples to overseas testing laboratories or the manufacturer that supplied the
product, for identification and assay and other relevant testing. This occurs under the environmental conditions
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 7 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
described and registered for the product.
It represents the SAHPRA’s position on medicines meeting the requirements for the safety, quality and efficacy of
medicines. SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality and
efficacy of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. If an importer/exporter of
medicines cannot meet the requirement of post importation testing, this guideline is also intended to provide
recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for waiver of Post-importation testing after the
registration of medicines. It is important that applicants adhere to the administrative requirements to avoid
delays in the processing and evaluation of applications. SAHPRA is committed to ensure that all registered
medicines will be of the required quality, safety and efficacy. Guidelines and application forms are available from
the office of the CRO/CEO and the SAHPRA website (www.sahpra.org.za).
3.
POST IMPORTATION EXEMPTIONS (PITE’s)
3.1
As stipulated prior, the default position of SAHPRA to ensure the quality safety, and efficacy of
imported medicinal products, the Applicant ensures the following tests:

Identification and assay, and/or other applicable tests as approved in the registered dossier
performed locally on the final product. Or

Return of samples to overseas testing laboratories or the manufacturers that supplies the product,
for identification and assay and/or other applicable testing.
Exemptions from post-importation testing will be considered in the following circumstances:
3.2
The applicant must in all instances provide full motivation for exemption from post-importation testing.
3.3
Required Documentation: The Company should submit a Product Quality Portfolio, which will provide
evidence that the manufacturing and subsequent handling of the product within the distribution chain,
both nationally and internationally, which conforms to prescribed standards and which are rigorously
controlled.
3.4
This Product Quality Portfolio will serve as evidence to assure that patients receive high standard of
quality medicines and to prevent the infiltration of substandard and suspected falsified medicine into
the supply system.
3.5
The Applicant completes the application letter and Product Quality Portfolio for post-importation
testing exemption, and submits the requirements to SAHPRA, accompanied by the relevant fees. At this
stage, the Applications will be uploaded to the FTP folder and proof of submission should be submitted
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 8 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
to inspectorate@sahpra.org.za
3.6
Included conditions are that the medicinal products must be transported via a qualified shipping
solution.
3.7
Ensure use of Calibrated monitoring devices (recording both minimum and maximum temperatures
and where applicable RH) must be inside the container to record the conditions (temperature and
relative humidity where applicable) whilst the product is in transit. Pre-existing global shipping
validation data from other shipping routes to be used in lieu of transport validation of the specific route
used for shipping of the product from the Principal to South Africa would require scientific justification
and would be subject to approval from SAHPRA
3.8
Products which are exempted from post-importation testing are not exempt from meeting regulatory
release parameters, including, but not limited to, product release specifications and the absence of
environmental condition excursions i.e., temperature and humidity as applicable.
3.9
Requirements: submission of PITE requests refer to (Attachment 1)
3.10 Evidence to Support Product Quality Portfolio: (Attachment 2)
3.11 Continuous monitoring and control of transport conditions. Refer to (Attachment 3) transportation of
products for monitoring and control of transport conditions.
3.12 Final Product Release (Attachment 4)
4.
GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING OF TRANSPORT
4.1
The parameters that the Applicant should comply with are specified in the Product Quality Portfolio
and one of the aspects is the monitoring of transport.
4.2
This section provides guidance monitoring and control of transport, that is, evidence that the
conditions during transport are continuously monitored and controlled, including relevant parameters,
such as temperature, humidity, and freeze conditions.
4.3
The transport monitoring and control conditions of each shipment are recorded by a suitable device
which provides a printout or data in a GMP compliant, validated data base that will form a permanent
record of the specific shipment and is filed with the batch release documents as applicable. Should the
printout relate to different products of the same shipment, a QA verified transportation data should be
reviewed and filed and/or be available electronically in relation to the batch release documentation.
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 9 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
4.4
An SOP, specifying the details of inclusion of the recorders, should be available for inspection. The
procedure should include amongst others, the number of recorders, position of placement, date of
activation and inactivation (on leaving the place of dispatch i.e., factory, and on receipt by the applicant
i.e., warehouse) and evaluation of the printout with the reference to the stability data and/or product
distribution stability data
4.5
The monitoring and control mechanism should be qualified and/or calibrated as applicable and
relevant records should be available for inspection. Thermo logger locations must be scientifically
justified.
4.6
If the data obtained through accelerated and long-term stability studies does not support that the
excursion has no impact on the long-term stability, then this data would not be considered as
justification for release of products which have been exposed to environmental excursions observed
during product transportation. This would include products sensitive to vibrations and lower
temperatures. Note that monitoring as well as control of these parameters must be assured
throughout transportation. The Applicant is to provide assurance that short term excursions do not
have any impact on the long-term stability of the product. Appropriate thermal cycling studies can be
used to support excursions above or below the approved storage conditions, provided there is no
impact on the long-term stability and in these studies data for assay and other relevant tests for
batches would be evaluated after exposure to short periods (cycles) of storage at each of two
temperature extremes with ambient temperature used between the cycles. The cycle periods and
extreme temperatures would be selected with consideration of the type of product (formulation,
packaging, dosage form) and approved storage conditions.
4.7
Please note that exemption is applicable only for shipments monitored and controlled, and shipments
not in compliance should therefore be identified and assayed and other relevant tests performed as
stated in 3.1 if not otherwise justified.
4.8
Post-importation testing exemptions are only applicable for product packed in the final container.
4.9
The transport monitoring and control method, and parameters must be specified in the Master Release
Document.
4.10 A tabulated summary indicating the method of transport, the conditions during transport and the
method of controlling the respective conditions should be submitted.
4.11 Outcome of the evaluation of the transport conditions and relevant action, i.e., further testing to be
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 10 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
performed.
4.12 The type of recorder used in transit and confirm temperature of transport vs temperature range of
loggers.
4.13 A specification that the received certificate of analysis is valid, is complete (reflects the actual results of
the tests performed) and reflects compliance with the registration requirements.
4.14 Visual identification of the product and dosage form.
4.15 Confirmation of the integrity of the containers, seals, and labels. Each aspect should be specified and
controlled to ensure that no damaged articles are accepted.
5.
PRODUCT QUALITY PORTOFOLIO
The Product Quality Portfolio will include the following:
5.1
Medicine Registration Certificate.
5.2
A summary of historical number of shipments over the last three years as applicable, and shipment
details including quantity of product imported and the yearly projection for future per annum. New
products won’t have this historical data, and this will be considered when determining the period of
PITE validity granted.
5.3
Product Dossier status including in terms of format e.g., MBR1, MRF1, CTD, amendment history and
evidence of effective dossier management e.g., Procedure on Dossier management and Dossier
Amendment History.
5.4
Container closure systems of the product and stability profile.
5.5
Current GMP certification of source site in terms of SAHPRA RRA and laboratories including contract
laboratories, as this is applicable to the HCR. Standalone local laboratories are authorised by SAHPRA.
For overseas contract laboratories, evidence that GMP status are verified as part of the Contract testing
and vendor approval is required to be provided.
5.6
The previous year data including at period before time of application for Market Surveillance Evidence
including complaints, recalls, suspensions and withdrawals of the product this could have a material
impact on the validity of the PITE granted.
5.7
The pharmacovigilance system is there to assess the safety profile of the medicine. If an ADR happens
in another country in relation to a product that is marketed in South Africa, this could ultimately
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 11 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
influence the PIL or PI in SA and thus there must be an awareness and review of this data. The PV SOP
and relevant data will be evaluated by Inspectorate and as part of Quality Portfolio and where
additional expertise required the information will be channelled to the relevant specialists If there are
market signals in terms of Post Market Surveillance and the product may be required to be tested.
There may be a requirement to either send the product to local laboratory to be tested or return to
source site. Thus, the Validation/Verification status of Analytical Methods and/or the Analytical
Method Transfer will be required when products are required to be tested should exemption be
withdrawn.
5.8
The GMP certificate from an RRA does not necessarily reflect the HCR product/s and a declaration is
required to clearly show that the product/s complies to the Validation requirements. Confirmation of
the Validation status of the product the Applicant is applying for exemption, both in terms of process
validation, cleaning validation continuous cleaning and process validation related at the source site.
5.9
Historical Post- importation testing data assessment including trend analysis. The data may not be
available for new products but may be available for established products and the time requirement
would be the previous year and that information could be retrieved from APQR.
5.10 Product transportation studies/principles and risk assessment profile which may be obtained from
historic monitoring data which maybe specific to the mode of transport and route.
5.11 The continuous monitoring process that is defined for controls during transport for each shipment of
pharmaceutical product including relevant parameters, such as temperature, humidity, and freeze
conditions utilizing a qualified process with calibrated instruments.
5.12 Provide evidence that the latest APQR has been performed and that a summary of this, including the
pertinent products were provided.
5.13 Serialisation means the application of a unique pharmaceutical products to the countries those who
have implemented serialisation regulations.
Evidence of serialisation or /tamper evident seals/
devices/ unique product identifiers etc should be submitted where applicable. As the Reliance Model
relies on a RRA reports and Certificates, some of those authorities are expecting a serialisation process.
SAHPRA has not implemented this process yet although is aligned with PICS, thus evidence of
Counterfeit combating system but not limited to serialization/tamper evident seals/ devices/ unique
product identifiers etc.
5.14 Nitrosamine Content declaration. Nitrosamine Content is a measure of the Quality Assurance of the
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 12 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
Product that throughout the supply chain of the product no Nitrosamine inducing substances or
processes are introduced. New guidance documents recommend steps manufacturers of APIs and drug
products should take to detect and prevent unacceptable levels of nitrosamine impurities in
pharmaceutical products. The guidance also describes conditions that may introduce nitrosamine
impurities. The recent unexpected finding of nitrosamine impurities, which are probable human
carcinogens, in drugs such as angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), ranitidine, nizatidine, and
metformin, has made clear the need for a risk assessment strategy for potential nitrosamines in any
pharmaceutical product at risk for their presence. Based on the current understanding, the guidance
discusses potential root causes of nitrosamine formation and advises API and drug product
manufacturers that they should conduct risk assessments of their approved or marketed products and
products with pending applications and take appropriate actions to reduce or prevent the presence of
nitrosamines in APIs and drug products
5.15 As part of Post Marketing Surveillance, SAHPRA may draw samples to be tested by SAHPRA at selected
Laboratory. SAHPRA will provide the applicant with the full details of the surveillance testing, including
the laboratory chosen which may be the source site. The methods will be provided by the applicant and
the Applicant will provide details of the AMT/AMV.
6.
FEES
6.1
The set fees will apply to submission of the Product Quality Portfolio.
6.2
The fee required is the fee for evaluation of requests for exemption from registered post importation
testing requirements per product as per the gazetted fees
7.
SUBMISSION
7.1
The data pack comprising of the Product Quality Portfolio will be submitted to SAHPRA for assessment
and review as per 5.0, and based on the supporting evidence assessed, SAHPRA will potentially exempt
that pharmaceutical products from post- importation testing for the period determined by the
evaluator of the application
7.2
Following the submission SAHPRA will provide an approval/non-approval within an envisaged 30-day
timeframe.
7.3
Exemption, if approved, will be valid for a period of one to up to three years provided that after the full
or partial requirements detailed in 4.0 above are complied with and this will be decided on the review
of the Product Portfolio submission.
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 13 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
7.4
Following this exemption, there could be a periodic review of the Product Quality Portfolio based on
variations/amendments and further exemptions could then be granted based on the updated review
and submission of applicable fees.
8.
POST IMPORTATION EXEMPTION GRANTED
Once SAHPRA has reviewed and approved the Product Quality Portfolio to support the exemption request, the
process followed by the Applicant will include the following (This will be the responsibility of the RP of the HCR
and the systems will be evaluated at time of audit but primarily the RP will inform SAHPRA as required).
8.1
Ensure that inbound and outbound logistics meet the storage conditions based on the validated routes
and temperature and humidity.
8.2
Evaluate excursions outside of registered storage conditions in terms of root cause and product impact.
8.3
It is the Applicants responsibility to perform root cause analysis when there is an excursion as well as
determine impact that the excursion could have on the long-term stability of pharmaceutical product.
8.4
Check visual container integrity, noting any tampering, potential contamination and potential for
falsified products.
8.5
Serialisation and track and trace process in terms of counterfeit prevention, where implemented.
8.6
Data loggers within the consignment, based on the transport validation, are removed on arrival, the
validated software is available to read the data and the data is used as part of the release to market.
8.7
If data loggers are faulty (no download or data) there will be requirement by default to test the product
and thus it be required that HCR have a laboratory registered as FPRC. The HCR will need to provide a
rationale on a case-by-case basis if there is a probability to release product to market.
8.8
Transfer product within a defined timeframe to assure compliance to registered storage conditions
especially thermolabile pharmaceutical products.
8.9
Ensure other conditions e.g. protect from light, humidity, etc. are complied with.
8.10 Where applicable, remove the retention/release samples and transfer to the HCR for evaluation for
release. Ensure the storage conditions of the retention /release samples where applicable are
maintained as these samples could be utilized for testing post marketing.
8.11 The data gathered from temperature monitoring devices must be recorded and analysed on a regular
basis to demonstrate that biological medicines are being stored and transported at the correct
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 14 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
temperatures.
8.12 Should there be a need to amend and address specific issues for Biological Medicines, this will be
assessed. Some elements are issues that are specific to different Biological Products (e.g., The use of
the identity and purity testing (RP-HPLC method) and the protein content (UV/VIS method) for post
importation of biologicals in place of the cell-based bioassay test).
9.
CONDITIONS OF EXEMPTION
9.1
Post-importation testing exemption does not negate the need for the Applicant to assume full
responsibility for product quality and for the release of products which are safe, effective and of high
quality.
9.2
SAHPRA reserves the right to withdraw the exemption should the Applicant give cause based on e.g.,
deviations from the approved Product Quality Portfolio or Any changes to the Product Quality Portfolio
including the transport monitoring and control equipment, commitments and data previously
submitted, invalidate the post-importation testing exemption granted. The Applicant has the
responsibility of post market surveillance including all serious adverse drug reactions reported in South
Africa, in relation to the imported medicine, in accordance with the SAHPRA vigilance guideline Post-
Marketing Reporting of Adverse Drug Reactions to Human Medicines in South Africa, as well as
notification and market signals e.g., Complaints, Withdrawals and Recalls in accordance with the
relevant SAHPRA guidelines.
9.3
The re-submission of the PQP, if triggered, will require a new application with concomitant fees.
9.4
SAHPRA reserves the right to request for the applicant to supply samples of the imported medicinal
product for testing and which will be for the Applicants cost
9.5
GMP status can change and an exemption can be withdrawn if, during an audit conducted by SAHPRA,
deficiencies are found which could affect the validity of the PITE granted previously and can occur at
any time regardless of the PITE period allowed.
9.6
Exemption, if approved, will be valid for a period of one to up to three years provided that after the full
or partial requirements detailed in Section 4.0 above, are complied with and this will be determined on
the review of the Product Portfolio submission and motivation.
10. PRODUCT RELEASE TO MARKET
10.1 Products which are exempted from post-importation testing are not exempt from meeting regulatory
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 15 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
release parameters.
10.2 As part of the release to market process, the Responsible Pharmacist or Deputy Responsible
Pharmacist is required to review the following (not exhaustive list) based on a robust internal
procedure:
10.2.1 Product storage conditions and product description as per current dossier
10.2.2 Confirmation of the integrity of the containers, seals and labels. Each aspect should be specified and
controlled to ensure that no damaged pharmaceutical products are accepted.
10.2.3 Evidence to support that the product imported is not subject to conditions that may result in
tampering / counterfeiting of the imported product.
10.2.4 Serialization and track and trace process in terms of counterfeit prevention.
10.2.5 The Batch Manufacturing and Packaging Record. The system that the Applicant uses needs to be
defined in terms of ensuring that the relevant dossier documents and the current source documents
at the manufacturing facility are the same. Any deviations from the source documents needs to be
provided to the Applicant. The rationale for the system in use will be evaluated by SAHPRA as part of
the
10.2.6 Out of Specifications and Out of Trend data summaries.
10.2.7 Deviations/Change Control.
10.2.8 Valid COA.
10.2.9 Data Logger Data: The product under discussion must be transported via a qualified shipping
solution. Calibrated monitoring devices must be placed inside the container to record the conditions
(temperature and relative humidity where applicable) whilst the product is in transit.
10.2.10 Outcome of the evaluation of the transport conditions and relevant action, i.e. further testing to be
performed.
10.2.11 Artwork and Labelling (Is it clear that the company details are available if there was a complaint).
10.3 Release to be completed with the review of the Release Samples which are stored at approved storage
conditions.
11. REFERENCES
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 16 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
The following related documents are referenced:
11.1 Medicines and Related Substances Act, as amended Act 101 of 1965
11.2 General Regulations to the Medicines and Related Substances act 101 of 1965, as amended
11.3 Regulation 53 of Act 101 of 1965 Sub-regulation (1)
12. VALIDITY
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces the Post Importing
Testing guideline, old document number 2.04. It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when required.
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 17 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
13. ATTACHMENTS
13.1 Attachment 1: Application Template for PITE
The Chief Executive Officer South African Health Authority (SAHPRA)
SAHPRA Head Office
Building A Loftus Park 2nd Floor
402 Kirkness Road
Arcadia 0083
Reference Number:
ATTENTION:
Inspectorate and Regulatory Compliance
Dear Sir / Madam
REQUEST FOR POST-IMPORTATION TESTING EXEMPTION
Product
Propriety
Name
Application
Number
Dosage
Form
API
First
Time
Exemption
Request
YES
NO
Renewal
of
Existing Exemption
Date
first
time
exemption granted
Motivation Summary for Exemption: Summary of reasons why exemption should be considered
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 18 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
13.2 Attachment 2: Evidence to support Product Quality Portfolio
Medicine Registration Certificate
A summary of historical number of shipments,
and
shipment
details
including
quantity
of
product imported and the yearly projection for
future per annum as applicable
Product Dossier status including in terms of
format e.g. MBR1, MRF1, CTD, amendment
history
and
evidence
of
effective
dossier
management.
Container closure systems of the product and
stability profile.
Current GMP certification of source site and
laboratories including contract laboratories as
this is applicable to the HCR.
Market
Surveillance
Evidence
including
complaints, recalls, suspensions and withdrawals
of the product
Pharmacovigilance system and listing of all
serious adverse drug reactions reported in South
Africa and internationally which may be pertinent
to South Africa, in relation to the imported
medicine.
Validation status of Analytical Methods and the
Analytical
Method
Transfer
required
when
products are required to be tested should
exemption
be
withdrawn,
or
post
market
surveillance testing is required
Declaration that Data Integrity management at
source site is complying to ALCOA+.
Confirmation of the Validation status of the
product the Applicant is applying for exemption,
both in terms of process validation and cleaning
validation at the source site
Confirmation that the source site performs
Continuous
cleaning
and
process
validation
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 19 of 25
SAHPGL-INSP-08_v5
related to the product that the Applicant is
applying for exemption
Historical
Post-
importation
testing
data
assessment including trend analysis.
Product transportation studies/principles and risk
assessment profile.
The
continuous
monitoring
process
that
is
defined for controls during transport for each
shipment of pharmaceutical product including
relevant
parameters,
such
as
temperature,
humidity,
and
freeze
conditions
utilizing
a
qualified process with calibrated instruments.
APQR profile and history.
Evidence of a Robust Self - inspection program
and how this was adapted to internal and external
audits
Evidence of Counterfeit combating serialization
or applicable process to support track and trace
system
Nitrosamine Content declaration
Application Fee and Proof of Payment attached:
I declare that

the request for post-importation testing is in line with the relevant current guidelines and/or a
motivation for any deviation has been submitted

no amendments, other than those stated in the amendment’s history, have been made.
Signature of RP/DRP:
Name
Title
Qualification
Designation
e-Mail
Tel number
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 20 of 25
13.3 Attachment 3: Summary of data: transportation of product
NAME OF PRODUCT:
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
DOSAGE FORM:
APPROVED STORAGE CONDITIONS:
ASSURANCE: TEMPERATURE RECORDED IN EACH SHIPMENT
Name
of
Product
Batch Number
Maximum
and
minimum
temperature
recorded
Applicable other
transport
sensitive
conditions
e.g. vibration
measurements
or RH
Duration of
transport (Date
commenced and
date
terminated)
Mode of
Transport
Signature of
Responsible
pharmacist who
verified
the
printouts
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 21 of 25
13.4 Attachment 4: An Example of Master Release Document (MRD)
COMPANY
MASTER RELEASE DOCUMENT (MRD) PRODUCT NAME:
Code:
Page x of y
Date:
Batch number
Approved storage conditions
Date of Manufacture
Final product specification reference number
Expiry Date of Product compared against ZA CTD
Receiving notice number (GRN)
Dates of dispatch and of receipt
Transit period specification, actual and conformity
YES
NO
Quantity dispatched
Number of containers received
Test
Specifications
Result
Signature
Shipping containers’ condition
Clean, undamaged
Number approved; Number rejected
Shipping container label
Not tampered with
Shipping container seal
Present, intact
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 22 of 25
Temperature and humidity
printout (storage and transport
conditions) Data loggers within
the consignment, based on the
transport validation, are
removed on arrival, the
validated software is available
to read the data and the data is
used as part of the release to
market.
Present, attached; conforms to
product
specific
storage
and
handling requirements
Data Logger Data: The product
under discussion must be
transported in a validated
container. Calibrated
monitoring devices must be
placed inside the container to
record the conditions
(temperature and relative
humidity) whilst the product is
in transit
Location
and
Assessment
of
Loggers
Ensure
that
inbound
and
outbound logistics meet the
storage conditions based on the
validated routes, temperature
and humidity
Route Analysis and excursions
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 23 of 25
If data loggers are faulty (no
download or reading) there will
be requirement by default to
test the product and thus it be
required that HCR have a local
laboratory registered as FPRC
for if testing has to be done or
to return product back to
Determine functioning and assess
PIT
Outcome of the evaluation of
the transport conditions and
relevant
action,
i.e.
further
testing to be performed.
Assessment of excursions
Certificate of Analysis Valid COA
and Data Trend summary.
Present, valid (batch specific), all
test conducted as conforms to ZA
CTD, complete
The Batch Manufacturing and
Packaging Record or defined
Present
Out of Specifications and Out of
Trend data summaries.
Declaration and outcome
Deviations/Change Control
Record and impact assessed
Transfer product immediately to
registered
storage
conditions
especially
thermolabilei
Product transfer
Ensure other conditions
e.g.
protect from light, humidity, etc.
Storage Conditions
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
Guideline for Post Importing Testing
18 September 2022
SAHPGL-INSP-01_v5
Page 25 of 25
Originator
Reviewer
Approved
Authorised
Designation
Designation
Designation
Signature
Signature
Signature
Date
Date
Date
Release
to
be
done
in
conjunction of the review of the
data of the previous APQR
Previous APQR Review
Conclusion: Conformance
YES
NO
Further testing required?
YES
NO
Comments
Position/Function
