SA GCP 2020 1 
 
South African  
Good Clinical Practice: 
Clinical Trial Guidelines 
 
Third edition 
Suggested citation: Department of Health, 2020. South African Good Clinical 
Practice: Clinical Trial Guidelines  
Pretoria, South Africa 
2 
SA GCP 2020  
 
PREAMBLE 
The South African Good Clinical Practice: Clinical Trial Guidelines promote good practice in 
the conduct of clinical trials in South Africa. Compliance with these guidelines is mandated 
by Section 90(s) and 72(6)(c) of the National Health Act, Act No. 61 of 2003 as well as 
Regulation 30 of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, Act No. 101 of 1965, as well as 
the national research ethics guidelines: Ethics in Health Research: Principles, Processes and 
Structures Department of Health 2015 (or its successor).   
This is the third edition of the South African Guidelines for Good Practice in the Conduct of 
Clinical Trials involving human participants (referred to as SA GCP 2020), which supersedes 
the Guidelines published in 2006. The revision of the Guidelines was done in collaboration by 
representatives from the Department of Health, the South African Health Product Regulatory 
Authority (SAHPRA) and the National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC).  
The Guidelines address investigators, research ethics committees, pharmaceutical 
manufacturers and other sponsors of research, medicines regulatory authorities, trial 
participants, the general public and all persons with an interest in clinical trials research in 
South Africa.  
The Guidelines have been carefully revised to align with the Department of Health Ethics in 
Health Research Guidelines 2nd edition 2015 (DoH 2015). It is important for users to 
familiarise themselves with the clear alignment between DoH 2015 and SA GCP 2020 so that 
they design, plan, manage and conduct their clinical trials in accordance with the ethical 
principles and values that underpin their practical application to clinical trials.  
The updated Guidelines encourage improved more efficient approaches to clinical trial 
design, conduct, oversight, recording and reporting, to ensure continued adherence to the 
highest ethical and scientific standards to promote protection of participants as well as 
validity of trial results. 
The Guidelines apply to both academic and contract clinical research, and are intended to 
apply to all stages of health product development - both before and after product 
registration and marketing. The Guidelines apply, in whole or in part, to biomedical research 
in general. Further, they provide a resource for journal editors to assist with determining 
acceptability of reported research for publication and, specifically, of any study that could 
influence the use of or the terms of registration of the pharmaceutical product concerned. In 
addition, the Guidelines are an educational tool for everyone who engages in biomedical 
research, especially every newly trained clinician. 
 
 
DR ZWELINI MKHIZE 
MINISTER OF HEALTH 
SA GCP 2020 3 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The editorial team relied on their experience and knowledge, on experts' advice sought 
through consultation with industry, academic research ethics committees and various other 
interested parties, available literature, various country experiences, and internationally 
accepted standards and guidelines.  
I express my sincere gratitude to all those who contributed to the revision of these 
guidelines, in particular the following: Mrs Portia Nkambule (Chief Regulatory Officer, 
SAHPRA), Dr Dorah Diale,  Ms Kedibone Malatji and the GCP Task Team which comprised of 
the following: Prof Lesley Burgess, Prof Paul Ruff and Dr Ngokoana Khomo (SAHPRA Clinical 
Trials Committee), and Dr Mamello Sekhoacha and Prof Anne Pope (NHREC). 
I further sincerely thank all individuals and groups who reviewed and provided comments 
and inputs to the revision process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
SA GCP 2020  
 
CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page no. 
PREAMBLE   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
ACRONYMS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
1.1 
Purpose of the guidelines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
1.2 
Scope of the guidelines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
1.3 
Legal Status of the guidelines 
 
 
 
 
          10 
2. 
KEY CONCEPTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS  
 
 
 
 
11 
2.1 
Ethical Principles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
2.2 
Justification for Trial  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
2.3 
Risk, Burdens and Benefits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
2.4 
Rights and Safety of Participants 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
2.5 
Informed Consent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
2.6 
Ethics Review  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
2.7 
Trial Incentives and Participant Reimbursement 
 
 
 
13 
2.8 
Scientific requirements for research protocols 
 
 
 
14 
2.9 
Data management and dissemination of research results 
 
 
14 
3. 
MANAGING RECRUITMENT OF VULNERABLE PARTICIPANTS  
15 
3.1 
Factors contributing to Vulnerability  
 
 
 
 
15 
3.2 
Minors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
3.3 
Adults with factual incapacity to provide informed consent  
 
16 
3.4 
Persons in dependent relationships or comparable situations 
 
16 
4. 
REGULATORY AUTHORITIES’ ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
17 
4.1 
National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC) 
 
 
 
17 
4.2 
The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA)  
17 
4.3 
Research Ethics Committees (RECs)  
 
 
 
 
17 
4.4 
South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) 
 
 
19 
4.5 
National Health Research Committee (NHRC) 
 
 
 
19 
4.6 
Provincial Health Research Committees (PHRC) 
 
 
 
19 
5. 
INVESTIGATOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
5.1 
Categories of Investigator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
5.2  
Investigator Qualifications and Agreements  
 
 
 
21 
5.3 
Adequate resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
5.4 
Medical care of trial participants 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
5.5 
Communication with REC and/or SAHPRA 
 
 
 
 
22 
5.6 
Compliance with the protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
22 
5.7 
Investigational Product(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
5.8 
Randomization Procedures and Unblinding  
 
 
 
23 
5.9 
Informed Consent for Clinical Trial Participants 
 
 
 
24 
SA GCP 2020 5 
 
5.10 
Records and Reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
5.11 
Progress Reports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27 
5.12 
Safety Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 
5.13 
Premature Termination or Suspension of a Clinical Trial 
 
 
 28 
5.14 
Final Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 29 
6. 
SPONSOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
6.1 
Quality Management and Control 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
6.2 
Responsibilities of the Sponsor 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
6.3 
Contract Research Organization (CRO) 
 
 
 
 
 33 
6.4 
Trial Management, Data Handling and Record Keeping 
 
 
 34 
6.5 
Information on Investigational Product(s) 
 
 
 
 
 35 
6.6 
Manufacturing, Packaging, Labelling and Coding Investigational Product(s) 35 
6.7 
Supplying, Handling Investigational Product and Waste 
 
 
 36 
6.8 
Record Access  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 
6.9 
Safety Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 37 
6.10 
Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
 37 
6.11 
Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 37 
6.12 
Audits  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40 
6.13 
Procedures to Manage Non-compliance 
 
 
 
 
 41 
6.14 
Premature Termination or Suspension of a Trial 
 
 
 
 42 
6.15 
Reporting and Release of Trial Results 
 
 
 
 
 42 
6.16 
Publication of Trial Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
7. 
CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL AND PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS  
 43 
7.1 
General Information  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 
7.2 
Protocol Background Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 
7.3 
Study Rationale and Motivation 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 
7.4 
Trial Objectives and Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
7.5 
Trial Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
7.6 
Selection of Trial Participants and Withdrawal from Trial Intervention 
 45 
7.7 
Investigational Product, Comparator and Concomitant Medication    
 46 
7.8 
Assessment of efficacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
7.9 
Assessment of safety  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
7.10 
Statistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
7.11 
Direct access to source data/documents 
 
 
 
 
 47 
7.12 
Ethical Considerations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
7.13 
Data Handling and Records Keeping  
 
 
 
 
 47 
7.14 
Financing and Insurance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
7.15 
Publication Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
7.16 
Supplements to the Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 48 
8. 
INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE  
 
 
 
 
 
 49 
8.1 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 49 
8.2 
Content of Investigator’s Brochure 
 
 
 
 
 
 50 
6 
SA GCP 2020  
 
9. 
ESSENTIAL DOCUMENTS TO CONDUCT A CLINICAL TRIAL 
 
51 
9.1 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
9.2 
Before the Clinical Phase of the Trial Commences 
 
 
 
51 
9.3 
During the Clinical Conduct of the Trial 
 
 
 
 
54 
9.4 
After Completion or Termination of the Trial  
 
 
 
56 
10. 
OTHER RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS 
 
 
 
 
58 
10.1 
Conflict of Interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
10.2 
Insurance Against Trial-Related Injuries 
 
 
 
 
58 
10.3 
Professional Indemnity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
10.4 
Sponsor Indemnification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
10.5 
Continuing Care After Research (Post Clinical Trial Access)  
 
61 
10.6 
Assessing Safety and Minimizing Risk 
 
 
 
 
61 
10.7 
Human Reproduction Considerations  
 
 
 
 
61 
10.8 
New Technologies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
10.9 
Electronic Signatures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
10.10 Therapeutic Misconception and Dual Roles  
 
 
 
62 
10.11 Conducting Clinical Trials during a Pandemic  
 
 
 
63 
11 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
12 
GLOSSARY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SA GCP 2020 7 
 
ACRONYMS  
ABPI:   
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry 
ADR:  
Adverse Drug Reaction 
AEs: 
 
Adverse Events  
ALCOA-CCEA: Attributable, Legible, Contemporaneous, Original, Accurate, 
 
Complete, Consistent, Enduring and Available) 
CGT:  
Cell and Gene Therapy  
CIOMS:  
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences 
COI: 
 
Conflict of Interest  
Co-PI:  
Co-Principal Investigator 
CRF:   
Case Report Form  
CRO:   
Contract Research Organization  
CTA: 
 
Clinical Trial Agreement 
CV: 
 
Curriculum Vitae 
DSMB:  
Data Safety Monitoring Board  
DoH:   
Department of Health 
GCP:   
Good Clinical Practice  
GCLP:   
Good Clinical Laboratory Practice 
GMP:  
Good Manufacturing Practice 
GPP: 
 
Good Pharmacy Practice 
HPCSA: 
Health Professions Council of South Africa 
IB: 
 
Investigator’s Brochure  
ICH:   
International Council of Harmonisation  
IP:  
 
Investigational Product  
NCE:  
New Chemical Entity 
NHA:   
National Health Act  
NHRC:  
National Health Research Committee 
NHREC:  
National Health Research Ethics Council 
NPI: 
 
National Principal Investigator 
PI:  
 
Principal Investigator 
PHRC:  
Provincial Health Research Committees 
REC:   
Research Ethics Committee 
SAE: 
 
Serious Adverse Event  
SA GCP:  
South African Good Clinical Practice: Clinical Trial Guidelines  
SAHPRA:  
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority  
SANCTR:  
South African National Clinical Trials Register  
SOP:  
Standard Operating Procedure  
Sub-I:   
Sub-Investigator 
TCAMS: 
Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines (TCAMS) 
TIE: 
 
Time, Inconvenience and Expenses 
TMF:  
Trial Master File 
WHO:   
World Health Organisation 
8 
SA GCP 2020  
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The optimal methodology by which to test and evaluate new treatments, medicines, 
interventions and devices is a carefully designed scientifically sound and ethical clinical trial. 
The underlying principle is that advances in health care knowledge are dependent on 
contributions from human participants, researchers and sponsors.  However, achievement of 
scientific goals is balanced against respect for and protection of the interests of human 
research participants and researchers.  Thus, clinical trials are acceptable only when they 
are ethical and safe both in design and the way they are conducted.  
The ethical considerations that inform the design of an ethical clinical trial are largely the 
same considerations that inform ethical health research more generally.  Nevertheless, 
aspects of clinical trials require special consideration, which necessitates explicit deliberation 
on these aspects.  Robust Good Clinical Practice (GCP) standards are necessary in addition 
to the ethical guidelines because clinical trials may have complex trial designs that involve 
invasive interventions, as well as investigative products and procedures that pose more than 
minimal risk of harm for participants. 
These revised GCP clinical trial guidelines (referred to as SA GCP 2020) have been updated 
to encourage implementation of improved and more efficient approaches to clinical trial 
design, conduct, oversight, recording and reporting, and to ensure continued adherence to 
the highest ethical and scientific standards to promote protection of participants and validity 
of trial results.  These guidelines align with the International Council of Harmonisation (ICH) 
Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R2) 2016 (ICH GCP 
2016), and with the Department of Health Ethics in Health Research Guidelines 2nd edition 
2015 (DoH 2015).  It is important for users to familiarise themselves with the clear 
alignment between DoH 2015 and SA GCP 2020 so that they design, plan, manage and 
conduct their clinical trials in accordance with the ethical principles and values that underpin 
their practical application to clinical trials.  
All necessary information contained in SA GCP 2006 is included in SA GCP 2020.  Some is 
consolidated, some is revised and updated, and some is reorganised in pursuit of providing 
user-friendly informative guidelines for conducting clinical trials. Where procedures or 
principles require explanation or elaboration for the South African context, these are 
addressed.  
1.1  
PURPOSE OF THE GUIDELINES  
1.1.1 These guidelines have the purpose of providing researchers and other 
interested parties with clearly articulated standards of GCP in locally 
conducted research that address the local realities and contexts, to ensure 
that clinical trials involving South African human participants are designed 
and conducted according to local requirements as well as according to the 
sound scientific and ethical standards within the accepted framework for 
good clinical practice. 
SA GCP 2020 9 
 
 1.1.2 Compliance with these GCP standards serve to assure the public that the 
interests, safety and well-being of trial participants are protected and also 
that clinical trial data are likely to be credible and meaningful.  
1.2  
SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINES  
1.2.1 These guidelines focus on design, planning, management, conduct and 
regulation of clinical trials involving human participants.  They do not repeat 
the ethical principles that underpin sound and ethical research, which are 
outlined in the Department of Health’s Ethics in Health Research: Principles, 
Processes and Structures 2nd edition (2015) (referred to as DoH 2015). 
The term ‘clinical trial’ is inclusive.  Specific types of clinical trials are not 
addressed separately unless a particular need is identified, i.e. ‘clinical trials’ 
includes trials involving complementary medicines, African traditional 
medicines, 
and 
non-pharmacological 
interventions 
including 
surgical 
procedures, medical devices, cell therapy, genetics and genomics, and 
imaging technology.  Consequently, these guidelines, read with DoH 2015, 
provide guidance for any clinical trial involving human participants, especially 
those with experimental designs. 
1.2.2 All role players involved with clinical trials should also be familiar with other 
national and international guidelines, including but not limited to the following 
current versions or their successors: 
1.2.2.1 
Department of Health’s Ethics in Health Research: Principles, 
Processes and Structures 2nd edition (2015) (referred to as DoH 
2015)  
1.2.2.2 
Declaration of Helsinki (2013) 
1.2.2.3 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Guideline for Good Clinical 
Practice E6 (R2) 2016 (ICH GCP 2016) 
1.2.2.4 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Investigation of 
Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population E11 2000 
1.2.2.5 
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences 
(CIOMS) International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research 
involving Human Subjects (2016) 
1.2.2.6 
CIOMS 
with 
WHO 
International 
Ethical 
Guidelines 
for 
Epidemiological Studies (2009)  
1.2.2.7 
Clinical Trial Compensation Guidelines, Association of British of 
Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) Guidelines (2014) 
  
1.2.2.8 
European Union requirements at 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/clinical-trials/index_en.htm  
1.2.2.9 
World Health Organisation WHO Technical Report Series, No. 850 
Guidelines for good clinical practice (GCP) for trials on 
pharmaceutical products (1995)  
1.2.2.10 
World Health Organisation Handbook for Good Clinical Research 
Practice (GCP) (2005) 
10 SA GCP 2020  
 
1.2.2.11 
World Health Organisation Good Clinical Laboratory Practice 
(GCLP) (2009) 
1.2.3 In the event of an interpretation conflict between these guidelines (SA GCP 
2020) and an international guideline, SA GCP 2020 takes precedence.  In the 
event of a conflict between SA GCP 2020 and a South African legal 
requirement where both appear to address the same issue or activity, 
generally, the legal requirement should take precedence, unless an ethical or 
GCP justification clearly demonstrates otherwise.  It is advisable for Research 
Ethics Committees (RECs) to consult with the National Health Research Ethics 
Council (NHREC) and/or South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
(SAHPRA) 
about 
which 
takes 
precedence 
situation 
to 
promote 
standardisation. 
1.3  
LEGAL STATUS OF THE GUIDELINES  
These guidelines are established in terms of Regulations issued in terms of sections 
90(s) and 72(6)(c) of the National Health Act, Act No. 61 of 2003 as well as 
Regulation 30 of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, Act No. 101 of 1965.  
Compliance with these guidelines is compulsory under the direction of the Director-
General of Health.   
SA GCP 2020 11
 
2. 
KEY CONCEPTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS 
2.1 
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES 
2.1.1 Clinical trials should be conducted in accordance with all the ethical principles 
outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki, and must be consistent with GCP and 
other applicable regulatory requirements.  
2.1.2 Ethical principles of beneficence and non-maleficence, distributive justice 
(equity) and respect for persons (dignity and autonomy), discussed in detail 
in 2.1 of DoH 2015, govern all clinical trials conducted in South Africa. 
2.2 
 JUSTIFICATION FOR TRIAL 
In preparing for a clinical trial, the specific aims, challenges and the risk of harm and 
the likelihood of benefit of the trial must be thoroughly considered.  The chosen 
design and methodology must be scientifically sound and ethically justified. 
2.3  
RISK, BURDENS AND BENEFITS 
2.3.1 All research involving human participants must be scrutinised to assess the 
potential risk of harm.  Clinical trials should be initiated and continued only if 
the importance of the objective and anticipated benefits outweighs the 
potential risks and burdens for the trial participants.  The ratio of risk of harm 
to likelihood of benefit must be assessed as part of the review process before 
the trial begins.  The assessment should take full cognisance of possible 
benefits and harms beyond the life of the trial itself, particularly in the case of 
chronic life-threatening conditions. 
2.3.2 A favourable ratio is one where, at minimum, the potential risk of harm to a 
participant is outweighed by the likelihood of benefit, to participants directly 
or to society in future, from the knowledge to be gained from the research.  
When making this assessment, both the magnitude of the harm and the 
probability of its occurrence should be addressed. 
2.3.3  Foreseeable harm (anticipated negative side effects) must be described 
clearly to enable RECs to understand and evaluate them against potential 
benefits that may result from the trial.  
2.3.4 Potential participants must be informed of potential risks of harm to enable 
them to make an informed decision about whether to participate in the trial. 
2.3.5 Researchers must supply information about the outcomes of previous pre-
clinical and clinical research on the investigational intervention and must 
justify the further research using the intervention. 
2.3.6 Research involving human participants who might face high risk of harm 
should only be approved after careful review and acceptable justification that 
demonstrates the potential importance and value of the research for society. 
A carefully phased approach should be adopted in such cases and appropriate 
harm mitigating measures must be put into place.  
12 SA GCP 2020  
 
2.4 
RIGHTS AND SAFETY OF PARTICIPANTS 
2.4.1 The rights, safety and well-being of trial participants are the most important 
considerations and should prevail over interests of science and society. 
2.4.2 The local Principal Investigator (PI) has, or the Co-Principal Investigators (Co-
PI) have, primary responsibility for the safety and welfare of local 
participants. 
2.4.3 Confidentiality of records, including electronic, that could identify participants 
must be maintained and access to records must be managed responsibly. 
2.4.4 Participants' right to privacy must be protected, e.g. by using appropriate 
precautions to avoid identification or recognition of participants. 
2.4.5 Systems with procedures that assure the quality of every aspect of the trial 
should be implemented.  Aspects of the trial that are essential to ensure 
human participants protection and reliability of trial results should be the 
focus of such systems. 
 
2.5 
INFORMED CONSENT 
2.5.1 Freely given informed consent must be obtained from every participant prior 
to clinical trial participation. 
NOTE: Where proposed participants are incapable of providing consent e.g. because of loss 
of consciousness, different procedures may apply; see 3.2.4.3 of DoH 2015. 
2.5.2 Informed consent documentation and procedures for multi-site and multi-
country trials must be sensitive to country- and site-specific requirements.  
The site PI must ensure that the informed consent content and procedures 
are tailored accordingly. 
2.5.3 The informed consent documentation must be approved by the REC before 
implementation.  The approved written Informed Consent should be signed 
and witnessed as applicable. 
2.5.4 In clinical trials involving minors, prior documented parental permission to 
approach the minor to invite participation must be obtained before 
approaching the minor. The minor chooses whether to participate and 
provides assent to indicate an affirmative answer.  See 3.1.9 and 3.2.2 of 
DoH 2015 for detailed information on informed consent and minors, including 
how to manage situations where the minors do not have parents or 
guardians. 
2.6 
ETHICS REVIEW 
2.6.1 All clinical trials involving human participants must undergo an independent 
ethical review.  The REC which undertakes the review must be registered 
with the NHREC. 
2.6.2 A registered REC must review and approve the protocol and associated 
documentation before any trial may begin, in accordance with 1.6 DoH 2015.  
2.6.3 The following aspects must be addressed explicitly:  
SA GCP 2020 13
 
2.6.3.1 
The scientific merit of the clinical trial.  
2.6.3.2 
Social merit of the clinical trial in light of South Africa’s research 
priorities. 
NOTE: If the topic for investigation is not high on the research priority list, the 
research may still be conducted subject to appropriate justification for doing the 
work.  
2.6.3.3 
Whether and why randomization is relevant, and how this is 
addressed. 
2.6.3.4 
The appropriateness of the inclusion/exclusion criteria for the 
South African context. 
2.6.3.5 
The appropriateness of the recruitment process for the South 
African context. 
2.6.3.6 
The feasibility of obtaining meaningful results with the lowest 
possible risk of harm for participants. 
2.6.3.7 
Whether the risk of harm is appropriately weighed against 
anticipated benefits for participants or the class of persons from 
which they are drawn.1 
2.6.3.8  
High risk of harm may be justifiable where the anticipated benefit 
is of high importance to increase relevant knowledge and 
appropriate mitigating measures are in place to minimise harm to 
participants. 
NOTE: Attention must be given to harms and benefits beyond the life of the trial 
itself, especially in respect of early phase studies and (pharmacovigilance) 
surveillance for chronic and life-threatening conditions. The proposal must explain 
what trigger alerts will be in place. Clear guidance for participants about post-trial 
care must be provided.   
2.7 
TRIAL INCENTIVES AND PARTICIPANT REIMBURSEMENT 
2.7.1 Using incentives to attract potential participants needs careful consideration. 
Incentives should not cause a person to ignore, minimise or undervalue the 
risks posed by the trial.  See 3.1.7 DoH 2015 guidelines for more details. 
2.7.2 The informed consent process should ensure that potential participants grasp 
the important considerations like the potential risk of harm and that they do 
not focus on incentives when thinking about whether to participate.  
2.7.3 However, paternalism must be avoided.  If a clinical trial has been approved 
on the basis that it is ethical including having a reasonable risk/benefit ratio, 
then no principled objection to persons choosing to participate should exist.  
2.7.4 Reimbursement or payment of participants’ expenses is not an incentive.  
Costs of transport and refreshments should be provided by the trial.  
 
1 See DoH 2015 2.3.4 for details; the PI is responsible for assessing the risk of harm; the REC may 
require additional protections if the risk of harm warrants it.  
14 SA GCP 2020  
 
2.7.5 A fair rate of reimbursement should be calculated using the Time, 
Inconvenience and Expenses (TIE) method2 to determine the cost to 
participants for time expended, inconvenience and refreshments associated 
with research participation.  This method costs expenses at the current hourly 
rate for unskilled labour in the marketplace, regardless of whether the 
participant is employed.  It should be noted that no prescribed 
reimbursement amount prevails in SA (see the document cited in footnote 2). 
2.8 
SCIENTIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR RESEARCH PROTOCOLS 
2.8.1 Clinical trials should be scientifically sound and be based on a thorough 
knowledge of the scientific literature, other relevant sources of information, 
as well as adequate laboratory and, if appropriate, ethical animal 
experimentation.  
2.8.2 The available pre-clinical and clinical information on an investigational product 
(IP) should be adequate to support the proposed clinical trial.  
2.8.3 Clinical trials should be described in a clear, detailed protocol. 
2.9 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND DISSEMINATION OF RESEARCH RESULTS 
2.9.1 All clinical trial information should be recorded, managed and stored to permit 
accurate reporting, analysis, interpretation and verification. 
2.9.2 This principle applies to all records referenced in this guideline, regardless of 
the nature of the medium of record. 
2.9.3 PIs are ethically obliged to ensure the reporting of a clinical trial’s existence 
and the findings obtained. 
2.9.4 PIs must report and disseminate research results or findings in a timely, 
accessible, responsible and competent manner.  This includes providing 
feedback to participant communities where appropriate, in accordance with 
the principle of role player engagement and collaboration. 
 
 
2 NHREC 2012 ‘Payment of trial participants in SA: ethical considerations for research ethics 
committees’ (available at http://nhrec.health.gov.za; also at https://sahpra.org.za). 
SA GCP 2020 15
 
3. 
MANAGING RECRUITMENT OF VULNERABLE PARTICPANTS 
3.1 
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO VULNERABILITY 
3.1.1 External circumstances like low levels of literacy and formal education, 
advanced age, young age, personal and socio-economic circumstances, 
including significant poverty and poor access to health care, may increase 
vulnerability of South Africans (see 3.2 of DoH 2015 for detailed discussion). 
3.1.2 Certain groups of persons are vulnerable due to diminished health, loss of 
liberty or other health-related personal circumstances, including adults with 
diminished decisional capacity, persons with mental illness, mental disability, 
or persons who have substance abuse problems, persons in dependent 
relationships, incarcerated offenders and persons highly dependent on 
medical care. 
3.1.3 Vulnerable persons should not be recruited merely because they are 
conveniently accessible if the research could be conducted with less 
vulnerable participants. 
3.1.4 The research for which vulnerable persons are to be recruited should be 
relevant to the health needs and priorities of their communities or groupings. 
3.1.5 RECs may impose additional measures to protect the welfare of vulnerable 
participants. For example, they may impose additional protective measures 
for the informed consent process, or require increased monitoring and interim 
reporting on the participants’ welfare. 
3.2 
MINORS 
3.2.1 Minors (younger than 18 years) are regarded as vulnerable persons due to 
their lack of legal capacity (See 3.2.2 of DoH 2015 for detailed discussion). 
3.2.2  Minors should participate in research only where their participation is 
indispensable to the research, i.e. the research cannot deliver the desired 
outcomes if adult participants were to be used instead (see 3.2.2.1 of DoH 
2015).  
3.2.3 RECs must note that clinical trial research is regarded as ‘non-therapeutic’ in 
terms of the legal framework. ‘Non-therapeutic research’ means research that 
includes interventions that will not hold out the prospect of direct health-
related benefit for the participant but may produce results that contribute to 
generalisable knowledge (NHA 61 of 2003, Regulation 135 of 2012).  
3.2.4 ‘Non-therapeutic’ research with minors requires Ministerial consent per Form 
A in the above-mentioned Regulations (to be completed by the applicant). 
The REC must ensure that its deliberations on the specified requirements for 
inclusion of minors as participants are properly minuted and recorded as 
required by the Regulations. The membership of the REC must include 
appropriate paediatric research expertise.  
3.2.5  Consent requirements for minors: For research purposes, the following should 
be obtained: 
16 SA GCP 2020  
 
3.2.5.1 Documented permission and/or consent from a parent or legal 
guardian in accordance with ss 10 and 31 of the Children’s Act 38 of 
2005 (see also 3.2.2.4 of DoH 2015). 
3.2.5.2 Assent from the minor in writing where he/she is capable of 
understanding. 
3.2.5.3  A child’s refusal to participate in research must be respected.  
3.2.6 Orphans without court appointed guardians may participate in clinical 
research when the minimum conditions of research (discussed in more detail 
in 3.2.2.3 of DoH 2015) are satisfied. In such cases, a parental substitute 
should be used to provide written consent. The parental substitutes should be 
used in descending order as listed in this paragraph of DoH 2015. 
3.3  
ADULTS WITH FACTUAL INCAPACITY TO PROVIDE INFORMED CONSENT  
Adults who are factually incapable of giving informed consent should participate in 
research only when their participation is indispensable to research.  In such cases 
proxy consent may be appropriate as detailed in 3.2.4 of DoH 2015.  
3.4 
PERSONS IN DEPENDENT RELATIONSHIPS OR COMPARABLE SITUATIONS 
3.4.1  Particular attention should be given to ensuring that participants are 
adequately informed and can choose voluntarily whether to participate in 
research.  
3.4.2 This group includes persons in junior or subordinate positions of hierarchically 
structured groups and may include but is not limited to the following:  
3.4.2.1 
Relationships between older persons and their caregivers; 
3.4.2.2 
Persons with chronic conditions or disabilities and their caregivers; 
3.4.2.3 
Persons with life-threatening illnesses;  
3.4.2.4 
Patient and health care professionals; 
3.4.2.5 
Employees and employers;  
3.4.2.6 
Members of the uniformed services; 
3.4.2.7 
Incarcerated offenders; 
3.4.2.8 
Wards of the state and guardians; 
3.4.2.9 
Students and teachers (including university lecturers); and  
3.4.2.10 
Relatives of the research team. 
SA GCP 2020 17
 
4. 
REGULATORY AUTHORITIES’ ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
4.1 
NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ETHICS COUNCIL (NHREC) 
The NHREC is the national statutory body established in terms of the National Health 
Act (NHA). The NHREC’s core responsibilities are to advise the Minister of Health, to 
set ethical norms and standards for health research, including clinical trials, and to 
advance research ethics in South Africa by promoting compliance by researchers and 
RECs using existing and new regulations and guidelines.  
The NHREC is mandated to register and audit RECs. In addition, the NHREC has 
responsibility for adjudicating complaints, and for advising institutional committees, 
researchers, members of the public, and national and provincial departments of 
health on ethical matters concerning research. 
This body reports to the Minister of Health and is supported by the Secretariat of the 
Research Directorate of the Department of Health. 
4.2 
SOUTH AFRICAN HEALTH PRODUCTS REGULATORY AUTHORITY (SAHPRA) 
SAHPRA is a statutory body established in 2018 in terms of the Medicines and 
Related Substances Act 101 of 1965 (the “Medicines Act”) for the purpose to provide 
for the monitoring, evaluation, regulation, investigation, inspection, registration and 
control of health products, including medicines, scheduled substances, medical 
devices, in vitro diagnostics, clinical trials and related matters in the public interest.  
SAHPRA must:  
4.2.1  Ensure efficient, effective and ethical evaluation or assessment of health 
products that meet defined standards of quality, safety, efficacy and 
performance, where applicable; 
4.2.2 Ensure that the process of evaluating or assessing and registering health 
products is transparent, fair, objective and concluded timeously; 
4.2.3 Ensure periodic re-evaluation or re-assessment and monitoring of health 
products;  
4.2.4 Conduct announced and unannounced inspections. 
4.3  
RESEARCH ETHICS COMMITTEES (RECs) 
4.3.1 The primary responsibility of RECs in South Africa is to ensure that all 
proposals to conduct health research involving human participants undergo 
rigorous independent ethics review. This responsibility is exercised to protect 
the research participants and to ensure that their rights, safety and well-
being are respected and protected.  
4.3.2 The REC may approve, require amendment to, or reject a research proposal 
on ethical and/or scientific grounds. The REC must record its feedback in 
writing and should include, where appropriate, reasons for rejection. The 
REC’s feedback should be structured to be instructive for the investigators 
concerned. 
18 SA GCP 2020  
 
4.3.3 The REC should have the following documents for each application for ethics 
review:  
4.3.3.1 Clinical trial protocol(s)/amendment(s);  
4.3.3.2 All documents and other material to be used to inform potential 
participants, including plain-language information sheets, informed 
consent forms, questionnaires, advertisements and letters; 
4.3.3.3 Investigator’s Brochure (IB); 
4.3.3.4 Any other additional safety, quality and/or efficacy information; 
4.3.3.5  Amount and sources, or potential sources, of funding for the clinical   
trial; 
4.3.3.6 Information about incentives or reimbursements available to 
participants;3 
4.3.3.7 Declaration of any affiliation and/or potential conflict of interest; 
4.3.3.8 The investigator’s current curriculum vitae (CV) and any other 
documentation evidencing suitable qualifications and experience; 
4.3.3.9 Evidence that the investigator has sufficient time to oversee the 
research project;4 
4.3.3.10 Evidence of current (i.e. within three years) GCP training as well as 
general research ethics training. Basic GCP training must be done by 
means of attendance at a face-to-face course and must include 
specific SA GCP 2020 training. Thereafter, three-yearly refresher GCP 
training must occur. Refresher training may be done online; 
however, the course must be relevant to the South African research 
environment and must include SA GCP 2020 training. 
 
NOTE: Trial staff whose GCP training has expired for more than three months must 
re-do the basic GCP course.  
4.3.3.11 Any other documentation that the REC may need to fulfil its 
responsibility, such as documents that address ethical concerns of a 
proposed research project. 
4.3.4 Requirements of membership of REC are covered in detail in 4.4.1 of DoH 
2015.  
4.3.4.1 The membership should include as many disciplines, sectors and 
professions as possible, appropriate to the research under review. 
4.3.2.2 REC members who review clinical trial proposals should have 
research ethics training and GCP training, evidenced by certificates 
issued not more than three years previously.  
4.3.5 The REC should have written standard operating procedures (SOPs) as per 
4.5 of DoH 2015.  
 
3 See note 2 above.  
4 For example, the investigator must declare how many open trials he or she currently oversees; this gives an 
idea of whether sufficient time is likely to be available or whether the investigator is overcommitted. It may be 
regarded as unethical conduct when the investigator is overcommitted so that appropriate attention is not 
available for a trial. 
SA GCP 2020 19
 
4.3.6 The REC should retain all relevant records (e.g. written procedures, 
membership lists, lists of occupations/affiliations of members, submitted 
documents, minutes of meetings and correspondence) for a period of at least 
three years or as per institutional requirement, whichever period is longer, 
after completion of the trial and make them available upon request from the 
applicable regulatory authority. 
4.4 
SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTER (SANCTR) 
The Department of Health has established the SANCTR, a web-based publicly 
accessible clinical trial register (www.sanctr.gov.za). Sponsors/Applicants must 
register all South Africa-based trials on the SANCTR. If there is no Sponsor, the PI 
must register the trial. Entry of the SAHPRA and REC approvals triggers allocation of 
a unique study number for each trial. No trial may commence without this DoH 
number.  
The SANCTR is intended to:  
4.4.1. Promote collaboration among researchers in both the public and private 
health care sectors through sharing research information;  
4.4.2 Inform the public to assist people to identify clinical trials for possible 
participation; 
4.4.3 Reduce duplication of research efforts; and  
4.4.4 Promote best use of limited research resources.  
NOTE: Registration with SANCTR does not equate with SAHPRA or ethics approval, both of 
which are essential to obtain BEFORE a trial begins. Usually SAHPRA and ethics review 
applications are submitted simultaneously to expedite matters. 
4.5  
NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH COMMITTEE (NHRC) 
The NHRC is the national statutory body responsible for determining the nature, 
scope, as well as the co-ordination of health research carried out by public health 
authorities. Its mandate is to ensure that priority health problems and needs receive 
appropriate attention and resources, and to advise the Minister of Health on 
implementation of an integrated national strategy for health research. In identifying 
priorities, the NHRC takes into account the burden of disease, the cost-effectiveness 
of interventions to address the burden of disease, the resource implications 
(especially at the lowest levels of health care delivery), and the health needs of 
vulnerable persons including women, older persons, children and persons with 
disabilities. Where appropriate, health needs of whole communities must also be 
considered. 
4.6 
PROVINCIAL HEALTH RESEARCH COMMTTEES (PHRC) 
The PHRC collects and transmits information about local health needs and resource 
constraints to the NHRC.  They are gatekeepers for public health care delivery sites.  
NOTE: Only PHRC’s that are registered with NHREC may also do ethics review of protocols. 
20 SA GCP 2020  
 
5.  
INVESTIGATOR  
5.1  
CATEGORIES OF INVESTIGATOR 
5.1.1 In most cases, clinical trials are conducted by an Investigator who has 
entered into an agreement with a Sponsor to conduct a clinical trial. She or 
he is the person responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at the trial 
site(s). In the case of a multi-centre trial, each site must have a local PI and 
at least one sub-investigator (Sub-I) who are registered with the Health 
Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA). It is unacceptable to have an 
‘absentee’ PI.  
5.1.2 The PI must be a South Africa-based clinician and must have actively 
participated in at least two clinical trials as a sub-investigator. The local PI 
has sole or joint responsibility for the conduct of trial and delegation of trial 
responsibilities of the trial.  
5.1.3 A Sub-I must be a South Africa-based member of the clinical team 
designated and supervised by the PI at a trial site to perform critical trial-
related procedures and/or to make important trial-related decisions.   
5.1.4 A Co-PI may be included and may be a qualified non-clinician South Africa-
based scientist; e.g. a laboratory/medical scientist, 
pharmacologist, 
pharmacist, dentist or equivalent qualified and experienced person who can 
provide trial oversight management. At least one Co-PI must be a clinician 
and qualified to provide medical oversight. A Co-PI must meet all the 
requirements to be a PI. The role of each Co-PI must be clearly described for 
the trial and their complementary responsibilities carefully detailed so that all 
responsibilities of the PI, as defined, are covered. While both Co-PIs have 
defined roles and functions in relation to the conduct of the trial, in terms of 
legal responsibility, they will be jointly and severally liable.   
5.1.5  For multi-centre studies in South Africa, a National Principal Investigator 
(NPI), with expertise and experience in the relevant field, may be appointed 
to take overall responsibility for the conduct of a trial. The NPI must meet all 
requirements to be a PI, must sign a declaration accepting responsibility and 
must sign off the SAHPRA clinical trial form (CTF1) application, co-ordinate 
concerns of investigators regarding conduct of trial and communicate these to 
the Sponsor/Applicant, RECs and SAHPRA, as necessary. It is recommended 
that the NPI should be involved as an investigator at one of the trial sites. 
NOTE: Trials using African Traditional Medicine as well as other Traditional, 
Complementary and Alternative Medicines (TCAMS) may have a Co-PI (non-clinical) 
with appropriate expertise, together with a clinically qualified Co-PI. 
5.1.6  If the PI and/or Sub-I withdraw(s) for any reason (including death) before 
completion of the study, a suitably qualified successor should be appointed by 
the Sponsor, and approved by SAHPRA and the relevant REC, to take over 
responsibility for conducting the trial.  
SA GCP 2020 21
 
5.2  
INVESTIGATOR QUALIFICATIONS AND AGREEMENTS 
The Investigator must: 
5.2.1  Be qualified by education, training and experience to assume responsibility 
for the proper conduct of the trial, and must meet all the qualifications 
specified by the South African regulatory requirements and provide evidence 
of such qualifications through a current CV and other relevant documentation 
requested by the Sponsor/Applicant, the RECs, and/or SAHPRA. 
 
5.2.2 Be thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the IP, as described in the 
protocol, in the current IB, in the product information and/or in other 
information sources provided by the Sponsor.  
5.2.3 Comply with GCP and other applicable regulatory requirements, including 
registration of the clinical trial with the SANCTR and reporting of Serious 
Adverse Events (SAEs) to the RECs and SAHPRA. 
5.2.4 Permit monitoring and auditing by the Sponsor, and inspection by South 
African and other appropriate regulatory authorities.  
5.2.5 Maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom he/she has 
delegated significant trial-related duties.  
5.3  
ADEQUATE RESOURCES 
The Investigator must: 
5.3.1 Demonstrate (e.g. based on retrospective data) the potential to recruit the 
required number of suitable participants within the agreed recruitment 
period. 
5.3.2 Have sufficient time to properly conduct and complete the trial within the 
agreed trial period. 
5.3.3 Have available an adequate number of appropriately qualified staff and 
adequate facilities for the foreseen duration of the trial to conduct the trial 
properly and safely. 
5.3.4 Ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed about 
the protocol, the IP and their trial-related duties and functions. 
5.3.5 Be responsible for supervising any individual or party to whom the 
Investigator delegates study tasks conducted at the trial site. 
5.3.6 Ensure that any party retained to perform study tasks is qualified to perform 
those study tasks.  
5.3.7 Implement procedures to ensure the integrity of performance of the study 
tasks performed and any data generated. 
5.4  
MEDICAL CARE OF TRIAL PARTICIPANTS  
5.4.1 A qualified clinician, who may be the PI, Co-PI or, if appropriate, a Sub-I, 
must be responsible for all trial-related medical decisions. 
22 SA GCP 2020  
 
5.4.2 The Investigator must ensure that adequate medical care is provided to a 
participant for any adverse events (AEs), including clinically significant 
laboratory values, related to the trial.  
5.4.3 The Investigator must inform a participant when medical care is needed for 
intercurrent illness of which the Investigator becomes aware. 
5.4.4 At all times the participant’s clinical interests must take precedence. 
5.4.5 It is recommended that the Investigator should advise the participant to 
inform his/her primary health care provider as well as any other healthcare 
provider he/she may see about his/her participation in the trial. Alternatively, 
the participant may give permission to the Investigator to perform this task. 
5.4.6 A participant is not obliged to give reasons for deciding to withdraw from a 
trial prematurely. However, to collate clinical trial information, the 
Investigator should make a reasonable effort to ascertain the reason, while 
fully respecting the participant's right to decline to disclose. 
5.5  
COMMUNICATION WITH REC AND/OR SAHPRA 
5.5.1 Prior to initiating a clinical trial, the Investigator must have written and dated 
regulatory and ethics approval for the research protocol, written informed 
consent form, consent form updates, participants recruitment procedures 
(e.g. advertisements), and other related documents from the REC and, if 
appropriate, from SAHPRA. 
5.5.2 During the clinical trial, the Investigator must provide the REC and/or 
SAHPRA (if appropriate) with all updated documents, including but not limited 
to, updated IB, additional safety data, updated informed consent and 
protocol amendments. 
5.5.3 The Investigator must provide regular REC (at least annually) and SAHPRA 
(at least six-monthly) progress reports. 
5.6  
COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL  
The Investigator: 
5.6.1 Must conduct the trial in compliance with the protocol agreed to with the 
Sponsor and approved by the REC and/or SAHPRA. The Investigator and the 
Sponsor must sign the protocol to confirm agreement. 
5.6.2 May not implement any deviation from or changes to the protocol without 
agreement by the Sponsor and further review and documented approval from 
the REC and SAHPRA of the amendment, except where necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to trial participants, or when the change 
involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial (e.g. change in 
monitors, change of telephone number).  
5.6.3 May implement a deviation from or a change to the protocol in order to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to trial participants. As soon as possible, the 
exceptional implemented deviation or change, the reasons for it and, if 
SA GCP 2020 23
 
appropriate, the proposed protocol amendment(s) should be documented and 
submitted to:  
(a) 
the REC for review and approval,  
(b) 
the Sponsor for agreement, and/or 
(c)  
SAHPRA.  
5.6.4 Should document and explain any deviation from the approved protocol. 
5.7  
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS  
5.7.1 Responsibility for IP accountability at a trial site rests with the Investigator. 
5.7.2 Where allowed/required, the Investigator may assign some of his/her duties 
for IP accountability at a trial site to an appropriate pharmacist or another 
appropriate individual under the supervision of the Investigator.  
5.7.3 Only a clinician with a dispensing license and/or an approved pharmacist may 
dispense IP at a trial site. 
5.7.4 IP may be imported into South Africa only after approval of the protocol by 
SAHPRA. Samples of the IP to be imported before trial approval require a 
section 21 permit from SAHPRA. 
5.7.5 The investigator and/or pharmacist or other appropriate individual, must 
maintain records of the IP’s delivery to the trial site, inventory at the site, use 
by each participant and return of unused product to the Sponsor or 
alternative disposition thereof. These records must include dates, quantities, 
batch/serial numbers, expiry dates (if applicable) and the unique code 
numbers assigned to the IP and trial participants, as appropriate. The 
Investigator must maintain records that document adequately that the 
participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and must 
reconcile all IP received from the Sponsor. 
5.7.6 The IP must be stored as specified by the Sponsor, and in line with Good 
Pharmacy Practice (GPP) and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) in South 
Africa, SAHPRA regulations and conditions. 
5.7.7 All unused IP of a trial must be disposed of in line with the protocol approved 
by SAHPRA.  
5.7.8 The Investigator must ensure that the IP is used only in accordance with the 
approved protocol. 
5.7.9 The Investigator, or the appropriate designee, must explain the correct use of 
the IP to each participant and should check, at intervals appropriate for the 
trial, that each participant is following the instructions properly. 
5.8 
RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES AND UNBLINDING 
5.8.1 The Investigator must follow the trial’s randomization procedures, if any.  
5.8.2 In blinded studies, the protocol must specify the circumstances under which 
the code may be broken and the procedure for unblinding. 
24 SA GCP 2020  
 
5.8.3 Any premature unblinding of the IP for whatever reason (e.g. accidental 
unblinding or due to a SAE) should be documented and promptly explained to 
the Sponsor. 
5.9 
INFORMED CONSENT FOR CLINICAL TRIAL PARTICIPANTS  
5.9.1. The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that an adequate information 
package, in an acceptable format appropriate for the South African context, is 
available for use in the process of seeking informed consent from participants 
to participate in the clinical trial (as described in 3.1 of DoH 2015). 
5.9.2 If the trial is a multi-site and/or multi-country trial, the site PI must ensure 
that informed consent procedures take cognisance of the characteristics of 
the site participants and tailor the informed consent content and procedures 
accordingly. 
5.9.3 All recruitment and informed consent documentation must be reviewed and 
approved by the REC before implementation in the trial. 
5.9.4 Written informed consent documentation and other participant-related 
information should be revised when new information that may be relevant to 
consent or to willingness to continue to participate in the trial becomes 
available. Any revisions must be submitted for ethics review and approval 
before implementation. Communication of the new information to participants 
must be documented. 
5.9.5 The Investigator or the trial recruitment staff must not coerce or unduly 
influence a participant to participate or to continue to participate in a trial.  
5.9.6 No information concerning the trial, including written informed consent 
documents, should cause a participant to waive or to appear to waive legal 
rights, or to release the Investigator, the Sponsor or their agents from liability 
for negligence. 
5.9.7 The language of the informed consent document should be non-technical and 
understandable to the participant or the impartial witness, where applicable. 
5.9.8 The informed consent document should be provided in a participant’s 
preferred written language. 
5.9.9 Participants must be given sufficient time to consider, to consult and to ask 
questions about the trial before being asked to choose whether to participate. 
All questions must be answered appropriately to the satisfaction of the 
participant. 
5.9.10 Participants and the person who conducted the informed consent discussion 
must personally sign and date the consent document.  
5.9.11 When participants can be enrolled only with assistance of the participant’s 
legally acceptable representative (e.g., minors or persons with factual 
decision-making incapacity), the participant should nevertheless be informed 
about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding 
SA GCP 2020 25
 
and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written 
informed consent. 
5.9.12 Where the participant or the legally acceptable representative is illiterate, 
verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of an impartial witness. 
The participant should indicate willingness to participate by making a mark 
(either a cross or a finger print). The witness signs to affirm that the 
participant willingly consented to participate. The witness dates the mark and 
his/her signature. 
5.9.13 The consent discussion and documentation must explain to potential 
participants:  
(a) 
That the trial involves research;  
(b)  
The purpose of the trial;  
(c)  
Why the potential participant has been approached; 
(d) 
That participation is voluntary; that refusal to participate, or 
withdrawal from the trial at any time, will not prejudice the ongoing 
care of the person in any way;  
(e) 
That access to trial IP may be randomly assigned and what the 
probability for random assignment to each arm is (where 
appropriate);  
(f) 
 How trial procedures are to be followed, including all invasive 
procedures;  
(g)  
The nature of a participant's responsibilities;  
(h)  
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental;  
(i)  
The foreseeable risks of harm or inconvenience to the participant and, 
when applicable, to an embryo, foetus or nursing infant;  
(j)  
The probability and magnitude of the foreseeable risks of harm; 
(k) 
 The expected benefits. When no anticipated clinical benefit to a 
participant is anticipated, the participant must be made aware of this 
(e.g. Phase I Clinical Trial); 
(l)  
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be 
available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and 
risks;  
(m)  
The compensation and/or medical treatment available to the 
participant in the event of trial-related injury;  
(n)  
The planned incentives, if any, to attract the participant;  
(o) 
The planned reimbursements, if any, for time, inconvenience and 
expenses; 
(p)  
That participant records may be accessible to Sponsor/Applicant, 
SAHPRA, NHREC, relevant REC and/or other regulatory authorities;  
(q)  
The identity of the person(s) to contact for trial-related queries and 
injuries; 
(r) 
REC contact details for information and concerns regarding the rights 
of trial participants;   
(s)  
The identity of the Sponsor;  
(t)  
Potential conflict of interest (COI) of the PI;  
26 SA GCP 2020  
 
(u)  
That trial records including those that identify participants are kept 
confidential within the bounds of the law;  
(v)  
The expected duration of participation;  
(w)  
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons that may lead to the 
participant’s participation in the trial being stopped;  
(x) 
The planned number of participants locally and globally involved in the 
trial; 
(y) 
That new information that may affect the willingness of participants to 
continue participation in the trial will be made available timeously to 
the participant. 
5.9.14 The Investigator, or an appropriate designee, should obtain the participant's 
consent to participate in the trial in accordance with the principles outlined in 
DoH 2015, the Declaration of Helsinki and other guidelines. 
5.9.15 When prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the 
participant's legally acceptable representative, if present, should be 
requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible, and the 
participant’s legally acceptable representative is not available, enrolment of 
the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or 
elsewhere, with documented approval/favourable opinion by the REC, to 
protect the rights, safety and well-being of the participant and to ensure 
compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The participant or the 
participant's legally acceptable representative should be informed about the 
trial as soon as possible and consent to continue and other consent as 
appropriate should be requested (see also 3.4 of DoH 2015). 
5.9.16 Once informed consent has been obtained, the original signed informed 
consent document must be kept with the trial records, and a copy of the 
signed informed consent document must be offered to the participant. A 
further copy of the signed informed consent document must be in the 
participant’s source documents or medical records. 
5.10 RECORDS AND REPORTS 
5.10.1 The Investigator is responsible for collection, quality, recording, maintenance 
and retrieval of source data arising from the clinical study.  
5.10.1.1 
The Investigator should maintain adequate and accurate source 
documents and trial records that include all pertinent observations 
on each of the site’s trial participants. 
5.10.1.2 
Source documents should adhere to the ALCOA-CCEA standard 
(attributable, 
legible, 
contemporaneous, 
original, 
accurate, 
complete, consistent, enduring and available). 
5.10.1.3 
The source document must be signed and dated by the clinician 
identified in the protocol, or designated person, on a visit-by-visit 
basis and stored securely. 
SA GCP 2020 27
 
5.10.1.4 
Changes to source data must be traceable, must not obscure or 
delete the original entry, and must be explained if necessary (e.g. 
via an audit trail). 
5.10.2 The Investigator should ensure the accuracy, completeness, legibility and 
timeliness of the data reported to the Sponsor by means of Case Report 
Forms (CRF). The design of the CRF should facilitate observation of the 
participant and be consistent with the study protocol.  
5.10.2.1  The protocol should specify which data will be entered directly 
into the CRF and will not be supported by other source data.  
5.10.2.2  Corrections to CRFs may be made only by the Investigator or an 
appropriate designee.  
5.10.2.3  Changes to CRFs must be traceable, must not obscure or delete 
the original entry, and must be explained if necessary (e.g. via an 
audit trail). 
5.10.3 Data collected by direct entry on a computer should be entered only by the 
Investigator and/or an appropriate designee.  
5.10.3.1 
The computer system must be virus-proofed, access-restricted 
and must record a data trail of all changes made to CRFs.  
5.10.3.2 
The system should be designed so that data changes are 
documented automatically, and so that no deletion of entered 
data can occur in order to maintain, audit and edit the data trail.  
5.10.3.3 
Once a hard copy of the computer stored data has been made, 
procedures for editing are as for paper CRF. 
5.10.4 The Investigator should maintain the trial documents as specified in the 
Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial (see Section 9 below). 
The Investigator must take measures to prevent accidental and/or premature 
destruction of these documents. 
5.10.5 Essential documents must be retained for at least 10 years after final closure 
of clinical trial or for at least two years after formal discontinuation of clinical 
development of the IP. 
5.10.6 A clinical trial agreement (CTA) must be signed by the Sponsor/Applicant and 
the Investigator. 
5.10.6.1 
Financial aspects of the clinical trial must be documented in the 
CTA. 
5.10.6.2 
The CTA must also describe in detail the responsibilities of the 
Sponsor/Applicant and Investigator. 
5.10.7 Upon request, the Investigator must make the data available for direct access 
by the Sponsor/Applicant to enable conduct of data editing and audit in 
accordance with the protocol and/or CTA. 
5.11  PROGRESS REPORTS  
5.11.1 The Investigator must submit written summaries of trial status to: 
(a) 
The REC annually, or more frequently as requested; and 
(b) 
SAHPRA every six months, or more frequently as requested.  
28 SA GCP 2020  
 
5.11.2 This information should include but not be limited to: 
5.11.2.1 
Progress to date, or the outcome in the case of completed 
research; 
5.11.2.2 
Current enrolment status (numbers, active or closed); 
5.11.2.3 
Whether participant follow-up is still active or has been 
completed; 
5.11.2.4 
Evidence of non-compliance with the approved protocol or any 
conditions of approval; 
5.11.2.5 
Relevant safety data. 
5.11.3 The Investigator should promptly provide written reports to the 
Sponsor/Applicant, the REC and, where applicable, the Institution on any 
changes that significantly affect conducting the trial and/or that increase the 
risk of harm to participants.  
5.12 SAFETY REPORTING 
5.12.1 The Investigator must inform the Sponsor/Applicant immediately upon 
becoming aware of any serious and/or unexpected AEs that occur during the 
trial, unless identified as unnecessary to report immediately by the protocol 
and/or another document (e.g. the IB).  
5.12.2 AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to 
safety evaluations should be reported to the Sponsor/Applicant in accordance 
with the reporting requirement and within the time periods specified in the 
protocol.  
5.12.3 In the case of participant deaths, the PI must supply the Sponsor/Applicant, 
the REC and SAHPRA with any additional information as requested.  
5.12.4 The initial and follow-up reports must identify the affected participants by the 
participant identification code. 
5.12.5 The initial serious adverse event report form and any relevant follow-up 
information must be sent to the Sponsor/Applicant, who in turn must forward 
the relevant information to SAHPRA.  
5.13 PREMATURE TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF A CLINICAL TRIAL 
5.13.1 If a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the 
Investigator must promptly inform the trial participants, and must ensure 
appropriate therapy and follow-up for them.  
5.13.2 If the Investigator terminates or suspends a trial without the prior agreement 
of the Sponsor, the Investigator must promptly inform the Institution (where 
applicable), the Sponsor, SAHPRA and the REC, and must provide a detailed 
written explanation for the termination or suspension. 
5.13.3 If the Sponsor terminates or suspends a trial, the Investigator must promptly 
inform the Institution (where applicable), SAHPRA and the REC, and must 
provide a detailed written explanation for the termination or suspension.  
SA GCP 2020 29
 
5.13.4 If the REC terminates or suspends a trial, the Investigator must promptly 
inform the Institution (where applicable), SAHPRA and the Sponsor/Applicant, 
and must provide a detailed written explanation for the termination or 
suspension. 
5.13.5 If SAHPRA and/or other regulatory authority terminates or suspends a trial, 
the Investigator must promptly inform the Institution (where applicable), the 
REC, and must provide a detailed written explanation for the termination or 
suspension. 
5.14 FINAL REPORT 
Upon completion of the trial, the Investigator must inform the Institution (if 
applicable), the REC and SAHPRA and must provide them with a summary of the trial 
outcome and other required reports. 
30 SA GCP 2020  
 
6.  
SPONSOR  
A Sponsor is the person or organisation responsible for the initiation, management 
or financing of a clinical trial. A Sponsor can be a pharmaceutical company, the PI, a 
funding body, or an individual or organisation designated by the funding body or 
academic institution.  
It is important that the Sponsor's roles and responsibilities are clearly articulated in 
the protocol and related documents. (For a description of the roles and 
responsibilities of the Sponsor for conducting clinical trials in South Africa, see 6.2 
below).  
A clinical trial can be conducted with or without a Sponsor. If a Sponsor is involved, 
both the Sponsor and the PI should collaborate to design, conduct and report the 
trial and its results. If there is no Sponsor, the PI must state clearly in the protocol 
who takes on the role of the Sponsor in the initiation, management and funding of 
the trial.  
An Applicant can be an individual, company, institution, or organisation that acts on 
behalf of the Sponsor to initiate and manage the trial as its local representative.  In 
the case of an international Sponsor, a local Applicant designated by the Sponsor is 
responsible for initiation and management of the trial in the local context.  
The Sponsor may delegate some of its responsibilities to a Contract Research 
Organisation (CRO), which should be clearly documented.  The Sponsor and 
Applicant remain responsible for oversight of the conduct and monitoring of the trial. 
NOTE: All references to the Sponsor in this guideline also apply to an Applicant or CRO to the 
extent that the Applicant/CRO has assumed trial-related duties and responsibility of the 
Sponsor (see section 6.3.4 below). 
6.1  
QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL  
6.1.1 Quality Management 
6.1.1.1 
The Sponsor should implement a quality management system to 
manage quality throughout the design, conduct, recording, evaluation, 
reporting and archiving of clinical trials. 
6.1.1.2 
The Sponsor should focus on trial activities that promote human 
participant protection and reliability of trial results. These include: 
a) 
Utilization of qualified individuals, as appropriate, throughout all 
stages of the trial process, from designing the protocol and CRF 
to analysing and preparing the clinical trial reports. 
b) 
Designating appropriately qualified medical personnel to be 
available to advise on trial-related medical questions and 
problems. 
c) 
Ensuring that all aspects of the trial are operationally feasible 
and avoiding unnecessary complexity, procedures and data 
collection.  
6.1.1.3 
A number of different quality management systems may be used and 
should be proportionate to the risks inherent in the trial. Regardless of 
SA GCP 2020 31
 
the system used, a risk-based approach should be adopted which 
focuses on: 
a) 
Identification of processes and data that are critical to assure 
human participant protection and reliability of trial results. This 
should occur during the development of the protocol. 
b) 
Identification of potential risks to critical trial processes and 
data. Such risks should include systems (e.g. trial facilities, 
SOPs, computerized systems, vendors) and clinical trial 
processes (e.g. trial design, data collection and recording, IP). 
c) 
Risk evaluation, including the likelihood of errors occurring given 
existing risk controls, the potential impact of such error on 
human participant protection and reliability of trial results, and 
the extent to which such errors would be detectable. 
d) 
Risk control: Sponsors should incorporate risk mitigation 
activities in the protocol design and implementation, monitoring 
plans, 
agreements 
between 
parties 
defining 
roles 
and 
responsibilities, systematic safeguards to ensure adherence to 
protocols and SOPs, and adequate training in processes and 
procedures. 
e) 
Risk communication to stakeholders to facilitate risk review and 
continual improvement during the conduct of the clinical trial. 
f) 
Periodical risk review to ascertain whether the quality 
management activities remain effective and relevant. 
g) 
Risk reporting by means of clinical study reports. 
6.1.2 Quality Assurance and Quality Control 
6.1.2.1 The Sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality 
assurance and quality control systems with written SOPs to ensure 
that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented 
(recorded) and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP and 
the applicable regulatory requirement(s). 
6.1.2.2 The Sponsor is responsible for securing agreement from all involved 
parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source 
data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and 
auditing by the Sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign 
regulatory authorities. 
6.1.2.3 Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to 
ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly. 
6.1.2.4 Agreements made by the Sponsor with the PI and any other parties 
involved with the clinical trial should be in writing, as part of the 
protocol or in a separate agreement.  
6.2 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SPONSOR  
6.2.1 Trial design:  
6.2.1.1 The Sponsor should utilise qualified individuals (e.g. biostatisticians, 
clinical pharmacologists, physicians, etc) as appropriate, throughout 
32 SA GCP 2020  
 
all stages of the trial process, from designing the protocol and CRFs 
and planning the analyses to analysing and preparing interim and 
final clinical trial reports. 
6.2.1.2 If the trial is a multicentre and/or multi-country trial, any differences 
in trial designs between the South African and other sites, must be 
clearly documented and explained in the trial protocol and/or related 
documents. 
6.2.2 Investigator selection: 
6.2.2.1 Sponsors should only select investigator(s) who are: 
a) Qualified by training and experience, and 
b) Have adequate resources to conduct the proposed clinical trial.  
6.2.2.2 Before entering an agreement with an investigator to conduct a trial, 
the Sponsor should provide the Investigator with the clinical trial 
protocol and up-to-date IB, and should provide sufficient time for the 
Investigator to review these documents. 
6.2.2.3 The Sponsor should obtain the Investigator’s agreement: 
a)  To conduct the trial in compliance with these Guidelines, ICH 
GCP, the requirements of the South African regulatory authority 
and with the protocol agreed to by the Sponsor and given 
approval by the relevant REC;  
b)  To comply with procedures for data recording and reporting;  
c)  To permit monitoring, auditing and inspection; and  
d)  To retain the trial-related essential documents until the Sponsor 
informs the Investigator/Institution that these documents are no 
longer needed. 
6.2.2.4 The Sponsor and the Investigator must sign the protocol, or an 
alternative document, to confirm this agreement. 
6.2.3 Submission to SAHPRA: Before initiating a clinical trial in South Africa, the 
Sponsor and the Investigator must obtain approval from SAHPRA to begin the 
trial.  
6.2.4 Confirmation of review and approval by REC 
6.2.4.1 The Sponsor should obtain from the PI: 
a) the name and address of the relevant REC registered with 
NHREC, and 
b) documented REC approval. 
6.2.4.2 If the REC grants approval conditional on required modifications, the 
Sponsor should obtain a copy of the modification(s) made and the 
date the final approval was granted by the REC. 
6.2.4.3 The Sponsor should obtain from the PI documentation and dates of 
any REC re-approvals/re-evaluations, and of any withdrawals or 
suspensions of approval. 
6.2.5 South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) 
6.2.5.1 All clinical trials to be conducted in South Africa must register with 
the SANCTR. Registration with the SANCTR requires that a trial is 
SA GCP 2020 33
 
approved by a REC and meets the requirements of SAHPRA. 
SANCTR facilitates registration of trials in accordance with the 
WHO's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform initiative that 
requires prior entry of clinical trials in a public registry as a condition 
for publication.  
6.2.5.2 The Sponsor must ensure that a trial is fully registered on the 
SANCTR before participants are enrolled. The Investigator and the 
Sponsor must communicate the information required to register the 
trial. For Investigator-initiated trials, the Investigator must register 
the trial.  
6.2.5.3 Clinical trials are registered at http://www.sanctr.gov.za. 
6.2.6 The Sponsor should provide insurance for all trial participants. In addition, 
they 
should 
indemnify 
(legal 
and 
financial 
coverage) 
the 
Investigator/Institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims 
that arise from professional malpractice and/or negligence. 
6.2.7 The financial aspects of the trial should be documented in a CTA between the 
Sponsor and the Investigator/Institution. A signed declaration must be 
provided by the Sponsor which states that there are sufficient funds available 
to complete the trial. 
6.2.8  Prior to initiating a trial, the Sponsor should define, establish and allocate all 
trial-related duties and functions. 
6.3  
CONTRACT RESEARCH ORGANIZATION (CRO) 
6.3.1 A Sponsor may transfer any or all of the Sponsor's trial-related duties and 
functions to a CRO, but ultimate responsibility for quality and integrity of trial 
data always remains with the Sponsor. Although the CRO must implement 
quality assurance and quality control, the Sponsor is responsible specifically 
for: 
6.3.1.1 Ensuring oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried 
out on its behalf; and 
6.3.1.2 Ensuring that the relevant CRO has the required skills, experience 
and competencies to conduct clinical trials. 
6.3.2 Any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a 
CRO must be specified in writing. In addition, the Sponsor must approve in 
writing any further sub-contracting of trial-related duties and functions by the 
CRO. 
6.3.3 Any trial-related dutiy and function not specifically transferred to and 
assumed by a CRO remains with the Sponsor. 
NOTE: All references to Sponsor in this guideline apply to a CRO to the extent that 
the CRO has assumed the trial-related duties and functions of the Sponsor. 
34 SA GCP 2020  
 
6.4 
TRIAL MANAGEMENT, DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 
6.4.1 The Sponsor must use appropriately qualified individuals to supervise overall 
conduct of the trial, to handle and verify data, to conduct statistical analyses, 
and to prepare the trial reports. 
6.4.2 The Sponsor may establish an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) to assess progress of a clinical trial, including safety data and critical 
efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the Sponsor whether to 
continue, modify or stop a trial. The DSMB must have written SOPs and must 
maintain written records of all its meetings. 
6.4.3 When using electronic trial data handling and/or remote electronic trial data 
systems, the Sponsor must: 
6.4.3.1  Ensure and document that the systems conform to established 
requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability and consistent 
intended performance (i.e. validation).  
6.4.3.2  The Sponsor must base its approach to validation of systems on a 
risk assessment that considers the intended use of the system and 
its potential to affect human participant protection and the reliability 
of trial results. 
6.4.3.3 Maintain SOPs for using these systems. Such SOPS should: 
a) Cover system setup, installation and use; 
b) Describe system validation and functionality testing, data 
collection and handling, system maintenance, system security 
measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency 
planning and re-commissioning; 
c) Describe the responsibilities of the Sponsor, Investigator and 
other parties with respect to the use of these computerised 
systems; and 
d) Make provision for training by all users. 
6.4.3.4  Ensure that the systems are designed to document data changes 
without deleting previously entered data (i.e. maintain an audit 
trail).  
6.4.3.5  Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the 
data.  
6.4.3.6  Maintain a register of persons authorized to make data changes.  
6.4.3.7  Maintain adequate data backup.  
6.4.3.8  Ensure that blinding, if any, is maintained during data entry and 
processing.  
6.4.3.9 Ensure the integrity and confidentiality of data, including any that 
describe the context, content and structure of the data – especially 
when making changes to computerized systems. 
6.4.4 If data are transformed during processing, it must be possible to compare the 
original data and observations with the processed data. 
6.4.5 The Sponsor must use an unambiguous participant identification code that 
allows identification of all data reported for each participant. 
SA GCP 2020 35
 
6.4.6 The Sponsor, or other owners of the data, must retain all the Sponsor-specific 
essential documents pertaining to the trial for not less than 10 years or until 
at least two years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical 
development of the IP. 
6.4.7 If the Sponsor discontinues clinical development of an IP, the Sponsor must 
notify all Investigators and SAHPRA. 
6.4.8 The Sponsor must inform the Investigator in writing of the need for record 
retention and must notify the Investigator in writing when the trial-related 
records are no longer needed. 
6.4.9 Any transfer of ownership of the data must be reported to SAHPRA. 
6.5 
INFORMATION ON INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 
6.5.1 When planning trials, a Sponsor should ensure that sufficient safety and 
efficacy data from pre-clinical studies and/or clinical trials are available to 
support human exposure using the proposed route, dosages, duration and in 
the trial population to be studied. 
6.5.2 The Sponsor must update the IB as new information becomes available. 
6.6 
MANUFACTURING, PACKAGING, LABELLING, AND CODING 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 
6.6.1 The Sponsor must ensure that the IP (including active comparator and 
placebo, if applicable) is characterised as appropriate for the stage of 
development of the product, is manufactured in accordance with any 
applicable GMP standards, and is coded and labelled in a manner that 
protects blinding, if applicable. Labelling must comply with South African 
regulatory requirements, including the Medicines and Related Substances Act 
No. 101 of 1965, and Regulation 30(9) (R.859 in GG 01464 dated 25 August 
2017).  
6.6.2 The Sponsor must determine the acceptable storage temperatures, storage 
conditions (e.g. protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and 
procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any. Compliance with GPP 
standards is required, where applicable. The Sponsor must inform all parties 
involved (e.g. monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of 
these determinations. 
6.6.3 The IP must be packaged to prevent contamination and deterioration during 
transport and storage.  
6.6.4 In blinded trials, the coding system for the IP must include a mechanism that 
permits rapid identification of the IP in case of a medical emergency but does 
not permit undetectable breaks of blinding. 
6.6.5 If significant formulation changes are made to the IP or comparator product 
during the course of clinical development, the results of any additional studies 
of the formulated product (e.g. stability, dissolution rate, bioavailability) 
36 SA GCP 2020  
 
necessary to assess whether the pharmacokinetic profile of the product is 
significantly altered must be available before use of the new formulation in 
clinical trials.  
6.7 
SUPPLYING, HANDLING INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) AND TRIAL-
RELATED WASTE 
6.7.1 The Sponsor is responsible for supplying a sufficient quantity of IP. 
6.7.2 The Sponsor must not supply an Investigator with IP until the Sponsor 
obtains all required documentation (e.g. REC and SAHPRA approval and other 
regulatory documentation). 
6.7.3 The Sponsor must ensure that written procedures include instructions and 
relevant documents for the Investigator to follow for handling and storage of 
IP for the trial. The procedures must address adequate and safe receipt, 
handling, storage, dispensing, retrieval of unused product from participants, 
and return of unused IP to the Sponsor (or alternative disposition if 
authorised by the Sponsor and in compliance with the SAHPRA-approved 
protocol). 
6.7.4 The Sponsor must:  
6.7.4.1 Ensure timely delivery of IP to the Investigator.  
6.7.4.2 Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, 
return and destruction of the IP. 
6.7.4.3 Maintain a system for retrieving IP and documenting such retrieval 
(e.g. for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, 
expired product reclaim).  
6.7.4.4 Maintain a system for disposal of unused IP and for its 
documentation. Disposal must be done according to South African 
regulations. 
6.7.4.5 Take steps to ensure that IP is stable over the period of use.  
6.7.4.6 Maintain sufficient quantities of IP used in the trials to reconfirm 
specifications, if necessary, and maintain records of batch sample 
analyses and characteristics. To the extent that IP stability permits, 
samples should be retained until analyses of trial data are complete 
or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), 
whichever is longer.  
6.7.4.7 The sponsor must provide and maintain a system for retrieving and 
disposal of trial-related waste (e.g. syringes and needles). 
6.8 
RECORD ACCESS 
6.8.1 The Sponsor must ensure that the protocol or other written agreement 
specifies that the Investigator must provide direct access to source 
data/documents for trial-related monitoring, audits, REC review and 
regulatory inspection. 
SA GCP 2020 37
 
6.8.2 The Sponsor must verify that each participant has consented to direct access 
to his/her original medical records for trial-related monitoring, audit, REC 
review and regulatory inspection. 
6.9 
SAFETY INFORMATION 
6.9.1 The Sponsor is responsible for ongoing safety evaluation of IP. 
6.9.2 The Sponsor must promptly provide written notification to the Investigator 
and SAHPRA of findings that may adversely affect the safety of participants, 
affect the conduct of the trial and/or change the REC's approval to continue 
the trial.  
6.9.3 The commitment to provide safety information must be included in the CTA 
signed between the Sponsor and the Investigator. 
6.10 ADVERSE DRUG REACTION REPORTING 
6.10.1 The Sponsor must expedite reporting of all adverse drug reactions (ADRs) 
that are both serious and unexpected to all concerned, including the 
Investigator and SAHPRA. 
6.10.2 Expedited reporting should occur within the timeframe and format specified 
by SAHPRA.   
6.10.3 The Sponsor must submit all safety updates and periodic reports to SAHPRA 
as required.  
6.11 MONITORING 
6.11.1 The purpose of trial monitoring is to verify that:  
6.11.1.1 The rights and well-being of human participants are protected;  
6.11.1.2 Reported trial data are accurate, complete and verifiable from 
source documents; 
6.11.1.3 The trial is conducted in compliance with the currently approved 
protocol (including any amendments), with SA GCP 2020 and with 
SAHPRA requirements.  
6.11.2 Selection and Qualifications of Monitors 
 
Monitors should be  
6.11.2.1 Appointed by the Sponsor.  
6.11.2.2 Appropriately trained, with the scientific and/or clinical knowledge 
necessary to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor’s qualifications 
should be documented.  
6.11.2.3 Thoroughly familiar with the IP, the protocol, the informed consent 
documents and other written information to be provided to 
participants, the Sponsor’s SOPs, SA GCP 2020, and SAHPRA 
requirements.   
6.11.3 Extent and Nature of Monitoring: 
6.11.3.1 The Sponsor must ensure that trials are adequately monitored in 
accordance with SAHPRA requirements. The Sponsor should 
determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring based on 
38 SA GCP 2020  
 
considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, 
blinding, size and endpoints of the trial.  
a) In general, on-site monitoring is necessary before, during and 
after the trial;  
b) Statistically controlled sampling may be acceptable for selecting 
data to be verified.  
6.11.3.2 The Sponsor must develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based 
approach to monitoring clinical trials. Flexibility in the extent and 
nature of monitoring described in this section is intended to permit 
varied approaches that improve the effectiveness and efficiency of 
monitoring. A combination of on-site and centralized monitoring 
activities may be appropriate. The sponsor should document the 
rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g. in the monitoring 
plan).  
6.11.3.3 On-site monitoring is performed at the sites at which the clinical 
trial is being conducted.  Centralized monitoring is a remote 
evaluation of ongoing and/or cumulative data collected from trial 
sites, in a timely manner.  
6.11.3.4 Centralized monitoring processes provide additional monitoring 
capabilities that can complement and reduce the extent and/or 
frequency of on-site monitoring by such methods as:   
a) Routine review of submitted data; 
b) Identification of missing data, inconsistent data, data outliers or 
unexpected lack of variability and protocol deviations that may 
be indicative of systematic or significant errors in data collection 
and reporting at a site or across sites, or may be indicative of 
potential data manipulation or data integrity problems;  
c) Using statistical analyses to identify data trends such as the 
range and consistency of data within and across sites; 
d) Analysing site characteristics and performance metrics;  
e) Selection of sites and/or processes for targeted on-site 
monitoring.  
6.11.4 Monitor's Responsibilities: 
In accordance with the Sponsor’s requirements, the Monitor must ensure that 
the trial is conducted and documented properly by carrying out the following 
activities when relevant and necessary to the trial and the trial site:  
6.11.4.1 Act as the main line of communication between the Sponsor and 
the Investigator;  
6.11.4.2 Verify that the Investigator has adequate qualifications and 
adequate resources throughout the trial period, and that facilities 
(including laboratories, equipment and staff) are adequate to safely 
and properly conduct the trial and remain adequate throughout the 
trial period;   
6.11.4.3 Verify, regarding the IP: 
SA GCP 2020 39
 
a) That storage times and conditions are acceptable, and that 
supplies are sufficient throughout the trial.  
b) That IP is supplied only to trial participants who are eligible to 
receive it and at the protocol specified doses. 
c) That participants are provided with the necessary instructions on 
properly using, handling, storing and returning IP.  
d) That receipt, use and return of IP at the trial sites are controlled 
and documented adequately.  
e) That disposal of unused IP at the trial sites complies with 
applicable regulatory requirements.  
6.11.4.4 Verify that the Investigator follows the approved protocol and all 
approved amendments, if any.   
6.11.4.5 Verify that written informed consent was obtained before each trial 
participant's participation in the trial.   
6.11.4.6 Ensure that the Investigator receives the current IB, all documents 
and all trial supplies needed to conduct the trial safely and properly 
in compliance with SAHPRA requirements.   
6.11.4.7 Ensure that the Investigator and the Investigator's staff are 
adequately informed about the trial.   
6.11.4.8 Verify that the Investigator and the Investigator's staff are 
performing specified trial functions in accordance with the protocol 
and any other written agreement between the Sponsor and the 
Investigator, and that functions have not been delegated to 
unauthorized individuals.   
6.11.4.9 Verify that the Investigator enrols only eligible participants.   
6.11.4.10 Report the participant recruitment rate.   
6.11.4.11 Verify that source documents and other trial records are accurate, 
complete, kept up-to-date and maintained.   
6.11.4.12 Verify that the Investigator provides all required reports, 
notifications, applications and submissions, and that these 
documents are accurate, complete, timely, legible, dated and 
identify the trial.   
6.11.4.13 Check the accuracy and completeness of the CRF entries, source 
documents and other trial-related records against each other. The 
Monitor should specifically verify that:   
a) The data required by the protocol are reported accurately on the 
CRFs and are consistent with the source documents;  
b) Any dose and/or therapy modifications are well documented for 
each of the trial participants;   
c) AEs, concomitant medications and intercurrent illnesses are 
reported in accordance with the protocol on the CRFs;   
d) Visits that the participants fail to make, tests that are not 
conducted, and examinations that are not performed are clearly 
reported as such on the CRFs;  
40 SA GCP 2020  
 
e) All withdrawals and dropouts of enrolled participants from the 
trial are reported and explained on the CRFs.   
6.11.4.14 Inform the Investigator of any CRF entry error, omission or 
illegibility. The Monitor must ensure that appropriate corrections, 
additions or deletions are made, dated, explained (if necessary) 
and initialled by the Investigator or by an authorised member;  
6.11.4.15 Determine whether adverse events (AEs) are appropriately 
reported within time periods required by GCP, the protocol, the 
REC, the sponsor and SAHPRA;   
6.11.4.16 Determine whether the Investigator maintains the essential 
documents; 
6.11.4.17 Communicate deviations from the protocol, SOPs, GCP and SAHPRA 
requirements to the investigator and take appropriate action 
designed to prevent recurrence of the detected deviations.   
6.11.5 The Monitor must follow the Sponsor’s written SOPs as well as those 
procedures specified by the Sponsor for monitoring a specific trial.  
6.11.6 Monitoring Report: 
6.11.6.1 The Monitor must submit a written report to the Sponsor and the 
Investigator after each site visit or trial-related communication;   
6.11.6.2 Reports must include the date, site, name of the Monitor and name 
of the Investigator or other individual(s) contacted;   
6.11.6.3 Reports must include a summary of what the Monitor reviewed and 
the Monitor's statements concerning significant findings/facts, 
deviations and deficiencies, conclusions, actions taken or to be 
taken, and/or actions recommended to secure compliance;  
6.11.6.4 Review and follow-up of the Monitoring Report with the Sponsor 
must be documented by the Sponsor’s designated representative;  
6.11.6.5 Monitoring results must be provided to the Sponsor (including 
appropriate management and staff responsible for trial and site 
oversight) in a timely manner for review and follow up as indicated. 
Results of monitoring activities must be documented in sufficient 
detail to allow verification of compliance with the monitoring plan.  
6.11.7 Monitoring Plan: 
6.11.7.1 The Sponsor must develop a monitoring plan tailored to specific 
human participant protection and data integrity risks of the trial.  
6.11.7.2 The plan must: 
a) Describe the monitoring strategy, the monitoring responsibilities 
of all the parties involved, the various monitoring methods to be 
used and the rationale for their use; 
b) Emphasize the monitoring of critical data and processes, and 
give particular attention to those aspects that are not routine 
clinical practice and that require additional training; and  
c) Reference the applicable policies and procedures.   
SA GCP 2020 41
 
6.12  AUDITS 
6.12.1 The purpose of a Sponsor's audit, which is independent of and separate from 
routine monitoring or quality control functions, should be to evaluate trial 
conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP and the applicable 
regulatory requirements. The Sponsor must perform audits as part of 
implementing quality assurance. 
6.12.2 Selection and Qualification of Auditors: 
6.12.2.1 The Sponsor must appoint individuals who are independent of the 
clinical trials to conduct the audits. 
6.12.2.2 The Sponsor must ensure that the auditors are qualified by training 
and experience to conduct audits properly. An auditor’s 
qualifications should be documented. 
6.12.3 Auditing Procedures: 
6.12.3.1 The Sponsor must ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance 
with the Sponsor's written procedures. 
6.12.3.2  The Sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit must be 
guided by the number of participants in the trial, the type and 
complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the trial participants, 
and any identified problem(s). 
6.12.3.3 Observations and findings of the auditors must be documented. 
6.12.3.4 To preserve independence and value of the audit function, the 
regulatory authority should not routinely request audit reports. A 
regulatory authority may request an audit report on a case by case 
basis when evidence of serious GCP non-compliance exists and/or 
during legal proceedings. 
6.12.3.5 When required by applicable law or regulation, the Sponsor must 
provide an audit certificate. 
6.13 PROCEDURES TO MANAGE NON-COMPLIANCE  
6.13.1 The Sponsor is ethically obliged to inform the appropriate REC and SAHPRA 
of possible instances of serious contravention of GCP during the course of a 
clinical trial that affect participant's safety, the credibility of data and/or the 
ethics of the trial. 
6.13.2 When significant non-compliance is discovered, the Sponsor must perform a 
root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive 
actions. 
6.14 PREMATURE TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF A TRIAL 
If a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the Sponsor must inform the 
Investigator/Institution, REC and SAHPRA promptly of the termination or suspension 
and the reason therefore.  
42 SA GCP 2020  
 
6.15 REPORTING AND RELEASE OF TRIAL RESULTS 
6.15.1 The Sponsor must ensure that trial results and outcomes are reported to the 
Investigators and SAHPRA as well as to the Department of Health via the 
SANCTR. 
6.15.2 The Sponsor and the PI are responsible for appropriate dissemination of the 
trial findings.  
6.15.3 Results should be disclosed within one year of completion of analysis of the 
trial results.  
6.16 PUBLICATION OF TRIAL RESULTS 
6.16.1 In principle, the Investigator has a duty and a right to publish trial results, 
and must negotiate accordingly with the Sponsor.   
6.16.2 For collaborative studies and multi-centre trials, publication conditions must 
be clearly described in the protocol, and approved by the relevant regulatory 
authorities. 
SA GCP 2020 43
 
 
7. 
CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL  
The contents of a trial protocol should generally include the topics mentioned below. 
Site specific information may be provided on separate protocol pages or addressed in 
a separate agreement. Some information may be in other protocol referenced 
documents.  
7.1 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
7.1.1 Protocol title, protocol identifying number and date. Any amendments should 
also bear the amendment numbers and dates.  
7.1.2 Name and address of the Sponsor and Monitor (if different from the 
Sponsor).  
7.1.3 Name of the person authorised to sign the protocol and amendments on 
behalf of the Sponsor.  
7.1.4 Name, address, and telephone number of the Sponsor's medical expert (or 
dentist when appropriate) for the trial.  
7.1.5 Name of the Investigator responsible for conducting the trial, and the address 
and telephone number for the trial site.  
7.1.6 Name, address and telephone number of the Investigator responsible for 
trial-related medical or dental decisions.  
7.1.7 Name and address of the clinical laboratory and other medical or technical 
department or institution involved in the trial.  
7.2 
PROTOCOL BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
7.2.1 Name and description of the IP.  
7.2.2 A summary of findings from pre-clinical studies and clinical trials that 
potentially have clinical significance relevant to the trial.  
7.2.3 Summary of known and potential risks of harm and likelihood of benefits, if 
any, to human participants.  
7.2.4 Description of and justification for the route of administration, dosage, 
dosage regimen and treatment period.  
7.2.5 A statement that the trial will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, 
GCP and the applicable regulatory requirements.  
7.2.6 Description of the population to be studied.  
7.2.7 References to literature and data relevant to the trial that provide context to 
the trial.  
7.3 
STUDY RATIONALE AND MOTIVATION  
7.3.1 The rationale and motivation for an ethically and scientifically valid trial are to 
ask relevant and important questions that have significance for local and 
international populations. Research should be conducted in a wide range of 
44 SA GCP 2020  
 
settings with different social, economic and geographical circumstances. 
Careful evaluation and examination as to current and future relevance for the 
research populations are required.  
7.3.2 The rationale should demonstrate that the research question under 
consideration has not been substantively answered previously and that 
adequate systematic review of the topic under investigation has occurred. 
Where appropriate, the existence of equipoise must be demonstrated. 
7.3.3 The research proposal should include descriptions of the anticipated method 
through which findings may be translated into mechanisms to improve the 
health status of South Africans.  
7.3.4 The social context of the proposed research population and the measures to  
protect against unfair exploitation or increasing the vulnerability of potential 
participants must be described.   
7.4 
TRIAL OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE 
A detailed description of the objectives and the purpose of the trial must be 
provided.  
7.5 
TRIAL DESIGN 
The scientific integrity of the trial and credibility of the data from the trial depend 
substantially on the trial design. The description of the trial design must include:  
7.5.1  A clear statement of the primary and secondary endpoints, if any, to be 
measured during the trial.   
7.5.2 The type of trial to be conducted (e.g. double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
parallel design) and a schematic diagram of the design, procedures and 
stages.  
7.5.3 The measures to minimise or avoid bias, including:  
7.5.3.1 
Randomisation and blinding 
a) Clinical equipoise is the principled basis for randomisation of 
participants: a genuine uncertainty exists about the IP or 
intervention that underpins the justification for the trial. 
b) Randomisation or a propensity score prevents bias in allocation 
of participants into different trial arms (e.g. treatment and 
control arms) and thus assists to obtain an outcome that 
reduces the uncertainty expressed by the concept. 
7.5.4  Use of placebo  
7.5.4.1 
If use of a placebo is proposed, this must be properly justified in 
terms of the Declaration of Helsinki and contextualised for local 
circumstances. 
7.5.4.2 
In principle, use of placebo in clinical trials is morally justifiable only 
when it is scientifically justifiable, i.e. a placebo may be used when 
there is no evidence that an existing treatment is more effective 
than placebo would be or where no proven treatment exists and 
SA GCP 2020 45
 
use of the placebo will not pose a risk of serious or irreversible 
harm to participants. 
7.5.4.3 
Placebo may be used as a comparator when no established 
effective intervention for the condition under study exists, or when 
placebo is added to an established effective intervention.  
7.5.4.4  When an established effective intervention exists, placebo may be 
used as a comparator without the established effective intervention 
only if:  
a) Compelling scientific reasons indicate use of placebo; and  
b) Delaying or withholding the established effective intervention 
poses no more than a minor increase over minimal risk of harm 
to the participant; and  
c) The risk is minimised, including through the use of effective 
mitigation procedures. 
7.5.5  The trial treatment, dosage and dosage regimen of the IP, as well as the 
dosage form, packaging and labelling of the IP.  
7.5.6  The expected duration of participation, the sequence and duration of trial 
periods, including follow-up, if any. 
7.5.7  The "stopping rules" or "discontinuation criteria" for individual participants, 
for parts of trial and for the whole trial.  
7.5.8  Accountability procedures for the IP, including placebo and comparator, if 
any.  
7.5.9  Maintenance of trial treatment randomisation codes and procedures for 
breaking codes. 
7.5.10  Identification of any data to be recorded directly on CRFs (i.e. without prior 
written or electronic record of data), to be considered to be source data. 
7.6 
SELECTION OF TRIAL PARTICIPANTS AND WITHDRAWAL FROM 
TRIAL INTERVENTION 
The following must be included: 
7.6.1  Participant inclusion criteria.  
7.6.2  Participant exclusion criteria.  
7.6.3  Participant withdrawal criteria (i.e. to terminate trial intervention) and 
procedures that specify:  
7.6.3.1 
When and how to withdraw participants from the IP treatment; 
7.6.3.2 
The type and timing of data to be collected for withdrawn 
participants; 
7.6.3.3 
Whether and how participants are to be replaced;  
7.6.3.4 
Follow-up for participants withdrawn from IP intervention/trial 
participation.  
NOTE: Withdrawal from trial intervention does not necessarily mean withdrawal from 
trial participation 
46 SA GCP 2020  
 
7.7 
 INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT, COMPARATOR AND CONCOMITANT 
MEDICATION 
7.7.1  The IP and comparator medication, if applicable, to be administered, 
including the name of the product, the dose, the dosing schedule, the route 
of administration and the administration period. 
7.7.2  Concomitant medication permitted (including rescue medication) or not 
permitted before and/or during the trial.  
7.7.3  Procedures for monitoring participant compliance.  
7.8 
ASSESSMENT OF EFFICACY 
7.8.1  Specification of efficacy parameters. 
7.8.2  Methods and timing for assessing, recording and analysing efficacy 
parameters.  
7.9 
ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY 
7.9.1  Specification of safety parameters. 
7.9.2  The methods and timing for assessing, recording and analysing safety 
parameters.  
7.9.3  Procedures for eliciting reports of and for recording and reporting AEs and 
intercurrent illnesses. 
7.9.4  The type and duration of the follow-up of participants after AEs. 
7.9.5  The protocol must make provision for appropriate therapy to manage any AEs.  
7.10 STATISTICS 
7.10.1  Describe the statistical methods to be used, including the timing of planned 
interim analyses, if applicable. 
7.10.2  State the number of participants to be enrolled. In multi-centre trials, the 
number of participants projected for each trial site must be specified. Provide 
the reason for the choice of sample size, including discussion and calculations 
of the power of the trial and the clinical justification.  
7.10.3  Justify the significance level to be used. 
7.10.4 Describe the criteria for termination of the trial. 
7.10.5  Describe the procedure for accounting for missing, unused and spurious data. 
7.10.6  Describe the procedures to describe and report deviation from the original 
statistical plan.  
7.10.7  Describe the selection of participants to be included in the analyses (e.g. all 
randomized participants, all dosed participants, all eligible participants, all 
evaluable participants).  
SA GCP 2020 47
 
7.11 DIRECT ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA AND DOCUMENTS 
7.11.1 The Sponsor must ensure that the protocol and/or other written agreement 
specifies that the Investigator must provide direct access to source data and 
documents for trial-related monitoring, audits, REC review and regulatory 
inspection. 
7.11.2 The Sponsor must verify that each participant has consented to direct access 
to his/her original medical records for trial-related monitoring, audit, REC 
review and regulatory inspection. 
7.12 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
7.12.1 Before submission of the protocol to the REC and SAHPRA, the local PI must 
describe ethical considerations pertaining to local conditions relating to the 
trial (see 3.1 and 3.2 of DoH 2015), including how the following aspects are 
addressed:  
7.12.1.1 Multi-centre or multi-national and collaborating trials with 
international research groups must comply with all local i.e. South 
African regulatory requirements;  
7.12.1.2 The trial design must be customised appropriately for the local 
setting to ensure that local realities are considered and 
appropriately integrated into the design.  
7.12.3 SAHPRA and RECs must review proposals carefully to ensure that feasible and 
appropriate modifications are made for the local context.  
7.12.4  In the interests of capacity building and transformation, SAHPRA and RECs 
should note, for multi-national trials, whether a reasonable proportion of 
significant project team members including scientists and health care 
professionals, are South African researchers, including those from previously 
disadvantaged backgrounds.  
7.12.5 If South Africa is selected as a clinical trial site but the country of origin or 
other high income countries are not, the Sponsor must explain the reason 
thereof and provide a clear ethical justification. 
7.13 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 
The aim of data management is to turn the information collected from a participant, 
efficiently and without errors, into data in the statistical database. All steps involved 
in this process must be documented to allow for step-by-step retrospective 
assessment of data quality and study performance, i.e. an audit trail.  
7.14 FINANCING AND INSURANCE 
Describe arrangements for financing and insurance (trial and malpractice), if not 
addressed in a separate agreement. 
7.15 PUBLICATION POLICY 
Describe the publication policy, if not addressed in a separate agreement. 
48 SA GCP 2020  
 
7.16 SUPPLEMENTS TO THE PROTOCOL 
Since the protocol and the clinical trial report are closely related, further relevant 
information can be found in the ICH Guideline for Structure and Content of Clinical 
Study Reports. 
SA GCP 2020 49
 
 
8  
INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE  
8.1 
INTRODUCTION 
8.1.1 The IB is a compilation of clinical and pre-clinical data on the IP relevant to 
study of the product in human participants. Its purpose is to provide 
Investigators and others involved in the trial with information to facilitate 
understanding of the rationale for, and compliance with, key features of the 
protocol, such as dose, dose frequency and interval, methods of 
administration and safety monitoring procedures.  
8.1.2 The IB supports clinical management of participants during the clinical trial. 
The information must be presented in a concise, simple, objective, balanced 
and non-promotional form to enable a clinician or potential Investigator to 
understand and make an unbiased risk-benefit assessment of the 
appropriateness of the proposed trial. Accordingly, a medically qualified 
person should participate in editing the IB, subject to approval by the 
disciplines that generated the described data. 
8.1.3 The type and extent of information available will vary according to the stage 
of development of the IP. If the IP is marketed and its pharmacology widely 
understood by medical practitioners, an extensive IB may not be necessary. 
Where permitted by regulatory authorities, a basic product information 
brochure, package leaflet or labelling may be an appropriate alternative, 
provided it includes current, comprehensive and detailed information on 
aspects of the IP of importance to the Investigator. If a marketed product is 
studied for a new use (i.e. a new indication), an IB specific to the new use 
must be prepared.  
8.1.4 The IB should be reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary in 
compliance with the Sponsor's written procedures. More frequent revision 
may be appropriate depending on the stage of development and generation 
of relevant new information. However, in accordance with GCP, important 
new information must be communicated to Investigators, and preferably to 
the REC and SAHPRA before it is included in a revised IB.  
8.1.5 Generally, the Sponsor must ensure that an up-to-date IB is available to the 
Investigator; Investigators must provide it to the responsible REC.  
8.1.6 In the case of an Investigator-Sponsored trial, the Sponsor-Investigator must 
determine whether an IB is available from the commercial manufacturer. If 
the IP is provided by the Sponsor-Investigator, then he/she must provide the 
necessary information to the trial personnel.  
8.1.7 Where preparation of a formal IB is impractical, the Sponsor-Investigator 
must substitute an expanded background information section in the protocol 
that describes the minimum current information as described in this guideline.  
50 SA GCP 2020  
 
8.2 
CONTENT OF INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE 
The IB should contain the following sections, each with literature references where 
appropriate:  
8.2.1  Table of Contents.  
8.2.2 Summary: A brief summary (preferably not exceeding two pages) must 
highlight the significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, 
toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic and clinical information available 
that is relevant to the stage of clinical development of the IP.  
8.2.3 A brief introductory statement should contain the chemical name (and 
generic and trade name for an approved product) of the IP, all active 
ingredients in the IP, its pharmacological class and expected position within 
this class (e.g. advantages), the rationale for conducting research with the IP, 
and the anticipated prophylactic, therapeutic and/or diagnostic indications. 
Describe the general approach to be followed in evaluating the IP.  
8.2.4 Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation. 
8.2.5 Pre-clinical Studies: The results of relevant pre-clinical pharmacology, 
toxicology, pharmacokinetic and IP metabolism studies must be provided in 
summary form which should address the methodology used, the results and a 
discussion of the relevance of the findings to the investigated therapeutic 
(and possible unfavourable or unintended) effects in humans.  
8.2.6 Effects in Humans: Discuss the known effects of the IP in humans, including 
pharmacokinetics, metabolism, pharmacodynamics, dose response, safety, 
efficacy and other pharmacological activities. Where possible, provide a 
summary of each completed clinical trial. Provide information about results of 
any use of the IP other than in clinical trials, such as experience during 
marketing. 
8.2.7 Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator: This section must 
provide an overall discussion of pre-clinical and clinical data, to synthesise the 
information from various sources on different aspects of the IP(s), wherever 
possible. In this way, an Investigator has the most informative interpretation 
of available data with an assessment of implications of the information for 
future clinical trials. Where appropriate, published reports on related products 
should be discussed to help the Investigator to anticipate ADR or other 
problems in clinical trials. 
SA GCP 2020 51
 
 
9  
ESSENTIAL DOCUMENTS TO CONDUCT A CLINICAL TRIAL  
9.1  
INTRODUCTION  
9.1.1 Essential Documents individually and collectively permit evaluation of the 
conduct of a trial and the quality of data produced. These documents 
demonstrate compliance by the Investigator, Sponsor and Monitor with the 
standards of GCP and applicable regulatory requirements. 
9.1.2 Filing Essential Documents at Investigator and Sponsor sites in a timely 
manner assists with management of a trial by the Investigator, Sponsor and 
Monitor.  
9.1.3 These documents are usually audited during the Sponsor's independent audit 
function and inspected by SAHPRA to confirm validity of the trial conduct and 
integrity of data collected. 
9.1.4 The various documents are grouped in three sections according to the stage 
of the trial during which they will normally be generated: 
9.1.4.1 
Before the clinical phase of the trial commences; 
9.1.4.2 
During the clinical conduct of the trial; and 
9.1.4.3 
After completion or termination of the trial. 
The purpose of each document, and whether it should be filed in either the 
Investigator/Institution or Sponsor files, or both is described. Documents may 
be combined, provided the individual elements are readily identifiable.  
9.1.5 Trial Master Files (TMF) must be established at the beginning of the trial, at 
both the Investigator's site and at the Sponsor's office. A final close-out of a 
trial can be done only when both Investigator and Sponsor TMFs have been 
reviewed, reconciled and confirmed that all necessary documents are in the 
appropriate files.  
9.1.6 Any of the documents addressed in this guideline must be available for audit 
by the Sponsor's auditor and inspection by SAHPRA. 
9.2  
BEFORE THE CLINICAL PHASE OF THE TRIAL COMMENCES  
During the planning stage, the following documents should be generated and be on 
file before the trial formally starts. 
 
52 SA GCP 2020  
 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
INVESTIGATOR'S BROCHURE 
To document that relevant and current 
scientific information about the investigational 
product has been provided to the Investigator 
X 
X 
SIGNED PROTOCOL AND 
AMENDMENTS, IF ANY, AND SAMPLE 
CASE REPORT FORM (CRF) 
To document Investigator and Sponsor 
agreement to the protocol/amendment(s) and 
CRF 
X 
X 
INFORMATION GIVEN TO TRIAL 
PARTICIPANT  
 
 
 
-   INFORMED CONSENT FORM 
(including all applicable translations) 
 
To document the informed consent 
X 
X 
-  ANY OTHER WRITTEN 
INFORMATION 
To document that participants will be given 
appropriate written information (content and 
wording) to support their ability to give fully 
informed consent 
X 
X 
-  ADVERTISEMENT FOR 
PARTICIPANT RECRUITMENT  
To document that recruitment measures are 
appropriate and not coercive 
X 
 
FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE TRIAL 
To document the financial agreement between 
the Investigator/Institution and the Sponsor for 
the trial 
X 
X 
INSURANCE STATEMENT 
(where required) 
To document that compensation to 
participant(s) for trial-related injury will be 
available 
X 
X 
SIGNED AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
INVOLVED PARTIES e.g. 
To document agreements 
 
 
- 
Investigation/Institution and 
Sponsor 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
- 
Investigator/Institution and CRO 
 
X 
X  
(where 
required) 
- 
Sponsor and CRO 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
- 
Investigator/Institution and 
authority(ies) (where required) 
 
X 
X 
DATED, DOCUMENTED 
APPROVAL/FAVOURABLE OPINION 
OF REC OF THE FOLLOWING:  
- 
Protocol and any amendments;  
- 
CRF (if applicable); informed 
consent form(s); 
- 
Any other written information to 
be provided to the 
participant(s); 
- 
Advertisement for participant 
recruitment (if used);  
- 
Participant compensation;  
- 
Any other documents given 
approval/favourable opinion 
To document that the trial has been participant 
to REC review and given approval/favourable 
opinion. To identify the version number and 
date of the document(s) 
X 
X 
SA GCP 2020 53
 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
REC COMPOSITION 
To document that the REC is constituted in 
accordance with GCP 
X 
X 
(where 
required) 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) 
AUTHORISATION/APPROVAL/ 
NOTIFICATION OF PROTOCOL 
(where required) 
To document appropriate 
authorisation/approval/notification by the 
regulatory authority(ies) has been obtained 
prior to initiation of the trial in compliance with 
the applicable regulatory requirement(s) 
X 
(where 
required) 
X 
(where 
required) 
CURRICULUM VITAE AND/OR OTHER 
RELEVANT DOCUMENTS 
EVIDENCING QUALIFICATIONS OF 
INVESTIGATOR(S) AND 
SUBINVESTIGATOR(S) 
To document qualifications and eligibility to 
conduct trial and/or provide medical 
supervision of participants 
X 
X 
NORMAL VALUE(S)/RANGE(S) 
FOR MEDICAL/ LABORATORY/ 
TECHNICAL PROCEDURE(S) 
AND/OR TEST(S) INCLUDED 
IN THE PROTOCOL 
To document normal values and/or ranges 
of the tests 
X 
X 
MEDICAL/LABORATORY/ 
TECHNICAL PROCEDURES/ TESTS 
-    Certification;  
-    Accreditation;  
-    Established quality control 
and/or external quality 
assessment; or  
-     Other validation              
To document competence of facility to perform 
required test(s), and support reliability of 
results 
X 
(where 
required) 
X 
SAMPLE OF LABEL(S) ATTACHED TO 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT 
CONTAINER(S) 
To document compliance with applicable 
labelling regulations and appropriateness of 
instructions provided to the participants 
 
X 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) 
AND TRIAL-RELATED MATERIALS (if 
not included in protocol or IB) 
To document instructions needed to ensure 
proper storage, packaging, dispensing and 
disposition of investigational products and trial-
related materials 
X 
X 
SHIPPING RECORDS FOR 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) 
AND TRIAL-RELATED MATERIALS 
To document shipment dates, batch numbers 
and method of shipment of investigational 
product(s) and trial-related materials. Allows 
tracking of product batch, review of shipping 
conditions, and accountability 
X 
X 
CERTIFICATE(S) OF ANALYSIS OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) 
To document identity, purity and strength of 
investigational product(s) to be used in the trial 
 
X 
DECODING PROCEDURES FOR 
BLINDED TRIALS 
To document how, in case of an emergency, 
identity of blinded investigational product can 
be revealed without breaking the blind for the 
remaining participants' treatment 
X 
X 
(third party if 
applicable) 
MASTER RANDOMISATION LIST 
To document method for randomisation of 
trial population 
 
X 
(third party if 
applicable) 
PRE-TRIAL MONITORING REPORT 
To document that the site is suitable for the 
trial (may be combined with the trial initiation 
monitoring report) 
 
X 
54 SA GCP 2020  
 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
 
 
 
 
TRIAL INITIATION MONITORING 
REPORT 
To document that trial procedures were 
reviewed with the Investigator and the 
Investigator's trial staff (may be combined with 
the pre-trial monitoring report) 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.3  
DURING THE CLINICAL CONDUCT OF THE TRIAL  
The following must be added to the files during the trial to evidence that all new 
relevant information is documented as it becomes available. 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator
/ Institution 
 
Sponsor 
INVESTIGATOR'S BROCHURE 
UPDATES 
To document that Investigator is informed in a 
timely manner of relevant information as it 
becomes available 
X 
X 
ANY REVISION TO: 
–   Protocol/amendment(s) and CRF 
–   Informed consent form 
–   Any other written information 
provided to participants 
–   Advertisement for participant 
recruitment (if used) 
To document revisions of these trial-related 
documents that take effect during trial 
X 
X 
DATED, DOCUMENTED APPROVAL/ 
FAVOURABLE OPINION OF REC OF 
THE 
FOLLOWING: 
–   Protocol amendment(s) 
–   Revision(s) of informed consent 
form and/or any other written 
information to be provided to 
the participant 
- 
Advertisement for participant 
recruitment (if used) 
- 
Any other documents given 
approval/favourable opinion 
- 
Continuing review of trial (where 
required) 
To document that the amendment(s) and/or 
revision(s) have been participant to REC review 
and were given approval/favourable  
opinion. To identify the version number and 
date of the document(s). 
X 
X 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) 
AUTHORISATIONS/APPROVALS/ 
NOTIFICATIONS WHERE REQUIRED 
FOR: 
–    Protocol amendment(s) and 
other documents 
To document compliance with applicable 
regulatory requirements 
X 
(where 
required) 
X 
SA GCP 2020 55
 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
 
 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
CURRICULUM VITAE FOR NEW 
INVESTIGATOR(S) AND/OR 
SUBINVESTIGATOR(S) 
 
X 
X 
UPDATES TO NORMAL VALUE(S)/ 
RANGE(S) FOR MEDICAL/ 
LABORATORY/TECHNICAL 
PROCEDURE(S)/TEST(S) 
INCLUDED IN THE PROTOCOL 
To document normal values and ranges that 
are revised during the trial 
X 
 
UPDATES OF MEDICAL/ 
LABORATORY/TECHNICAL 
PROCEDURES/TESTS 
–   Certification or 
–   Accreditation or 
–   Established quality control 
and/or external quality 
assessment or  
–   Other validation (where 
required) 
To document that tests remain adequate 
throughout the trial period 
X 
(where 
required) 
X 
DOCUMENTATION OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) 
AND TRIAL-RELATED MATERIALS 
SHIPMENT 
To document shipment dates, batch numbers 
and method of shipment of investigational 
product(s) and trial-related materials. Allows 
tracking of product batch, review of shipping 
conditions and accountability 
X 
X 
CERTIFICATE(S) OF ANALYSIS FOR 
NEW BATCHES OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 
To document identity, purity and strength of 
investigational product(s) to be used in the 
trial 
 
X 
MONITORING VISIT REPORTS 
To document site visits by, and findings of, the 
monitor 
 
X 
RELEVANT COMMUNICATIONS 
OTHER THAN SITE VISITS 
– Letters 
– Meeting notes 
– Notes of telephone calls 
To document any agreements or 
significant discussions regarding trial 
administration, protocol deviations/ violations, 
trial conduct, adverse event (AE) reporting 
X 
X 
SIGNED INFORMED CONSENT 
FORMS 
To document that consent is obtained in 
accordance with GCP and protocol and dated 
prior to participation of each participant in trial. 
Also to document direct access permission 
X 
 
SOURCE DOCUMENTS 
To document the existence of the participant 
and substantiate integrity of trial data 
collected. To include original documents related 
to the trial, to medical treatment, and history of 
participant 
X 
 
SIGNED, DATED AND COMPLETED 
CASE REPORT FORMS (CRF) 
To document that the investigator or 
authorised member of the investigator's staff 
confirms the observations recorded 
X 
(copy) 
X  
(original) 
DOCUMENTATION OF CRF 
CORRECTIONS 
To document all changes/additions or 
corrections made to CRF after initial 
data were recorded 
X 
(copy) 
X  
(original) 
NOTIFICATION BY ORIGINATING 
INVESTIGATOR TO SPONSOR OF 
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS AND 
RELATED REPORTS 
Notification by originating investigator to 
Sponsor of serious adverse events and related 
reports in accordance with the South African 
Good Clinical Practice: Clinical Trials Guidelines. 
X 
X 
56 SA GCP 2020  
 
 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
NOTIFICATION BY SPONSOR AND/ 
OR INVESTIGATOR, WHERE 
APPLICABLE, TO REGULATORY 
AUTHORITY(IES) AND REC(S) OF 
UNEXPECTED SERIOUS 
ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS AND OF 
OTHER SAFETY INFORMATION 
Notification by Sponsor and/or investigator, 
where applicable, to regulatory authorities and 
REC(s) of unexpected serious ADRs in 
accordance with SA GCP 
X 
(where 
required) 
X 
NOTIFICATION BY SPONSOR TO 
INVESTIGATORS OF SAFETY 
INFORMATION 
Notification by Sponsor to Investigators of 
safety information in accordance with the SA 
GCP. 
X 
X 
INTERIM OR ANNUAL REPORTS TO 
REC AND AUTHORITIES 
Interim or annual reports provided to REC and 
to authorities in accordance with accordance 
with SA GCP.  
X 
X 
(where 
required 
PARTICIPANT SCREENING LOG 
To document identification of participants who 
entered pre-trial screening 
X 
X 
(where 
required 
PARTICIPANT IDENTIFICATION 
CODE LIST 
To document that Investigator/Institution 
keeps a confidential list of names of all 
participants allocated to trial numbers on 
enrolling in the trial. Allows 
Investigator/Institution to reveal 
identity of any participant 
X 
 
PARTICIPANT ENROLMENT LOG 
To document chronological enrolment of 
participants by trial number 
X 
 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 
ACCOUNTABILITY AT THE SITE 
To document that IP(s) 
have been used according to the protocol 
X 
X 
SIGNATURE SHEET 
To document signatures and initials of all 
persons authorised to make entries and/or 
corrections on CRFs 
X 
X 
RECORD OF RETAINED BODY 
FLUIDS/TISSUE SAMPLES (IF ANY) 
To document location and identification of 
retained samples if assays need to be repeated 
X 
X 
 
9.4  
AFTER COMPLETION OR TERMINATION OF THE TRIAL  
After completion or termination of the trial, all the documents identified in sections 
9.2 and 9.3 should be in the file together with the following: 
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator
/ Institution 
 
Sponsor 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) 
ACCOUNTABILITY AT SITE 
To document that the investigational product(s) 
have been used according to the protocol. To 
documents the final accounting of 
investigational product(s) received at the site, 
dispensed to participants, returned by the 
participants and returned to Sponsor 
X 
X 
SA GCP 2020 57
 
Title of Document 
Purpose 
Located in Files of 
Investigator/ 
Institution 
Sponsor 
DOCUMENTATION OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT 
DESTRUCTION 
To document destruction of unused 
investigational products by Sponsor or at site 
X  
(if 
destroyed 
at site) 
X 
COMPLETED PARTICIPANT 
IDENTIFICATION CODE LIST 
To permit identification of all participants 
enrolled in the trial in case follow-up is 
required. List should be kept in a confidential 
manner and for agreed upon time 
X 
 
AUDIT CERTIFICATE (if available) 
To document that audit was performed 
 
X 
FINAL TRIAL CLOSE-OUT 
MONITORING REPORT 
To document that all activities required for trial 
close-out are completed, and copies of 
essential documents are held in the appropriate 
files 
 
X 
TREATMENT ALLOCATION AND 
DECODING DOCUMENTATION 
Returned to Sponsor to document any 
decoding that may have occurred 
 
X 
FINAL REPORT BY INVESTIGATOR 
TO REC WHERE REQUIRED, 
AND WHERE APPLICABLE, TO THE 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) 
To document completion of the trial 
X 
 
CLINICAL STUDY REPORT 
To document results and interpretation of trial 
X (if 
applicable) 
X 
58 SA GCP 2020  
 
10  
OTHER RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS  
10.1  CONFLICT OF INTEREST (COI) 
10.1.1 A COI arises when a secondary interest (e.g. scientific recognition or financial 
gain) conflicts with the ethical conduct of research, the primary goal of 
health-related research.  A COI may, or may be perceived, to directly or 
indirectly influence research activities, including but not limited to the choice 
of research questions and methods, recruitment and retention of participants, 
interpretation and reporting of data.  
10.1.2 COIs pose concerns because of the potential to affect the well-being of 
participants, as well as the integrity of the research.  
10.1.3 Conflicts may arise naturally from engagement between researchers, 
universities, Sponsors, funders, RECs, regulatory authorities and other 
entities. 
NOTE: The mere existence of a COI does not necessarily imply wrongdoing.  
10.1.4 COIs must be identified, disclosed and properly managed or eliminated to 
ensure transparency and accountability in trials.  
10.1.5 Institutions that host clinical trials and RECs that review proposals for clinical 
trials must have clearly formulated COI policies and SOPs; relevant personnel 
must know how to make disclosure and how to manage disclosures of 
affiliation with, or financial involvement in, any organization or entity with an 
interest in the subject matter or materials of researchers. 
10.1.6 The range of potential interests includes direct benefits, such as sponsorship 
of the investigation, indirect benefits, such as provision of material or 
facilities, and support of individuals, such as provision for travel or 
accommodation expenses to attend conferences. Disclosure should cover any 
situation in which COI may, or may be perceived to, affect decisions. 
10.1.7 Each individual is responsible for recognising situations in which he/she may 
have or may be perceived to have a COI, or might reasonably be seen by 
others to have a conflict, and to disclose to the appropriate person or entity 
and to follow the policy and procedures. 
10.1.8 If an individual is uncertain about the existence of a COI, enquiries should be 
made to the appropriate person as per the policy. 
10.2  INSURANCE AGAINST TRIAL-RELATED INJURIES  
10.2.1 Basic Principles:5 
10.2.1.1 Research participants should not bear any financial cost to rectify 
harms that occur as a result of trial participation. It is thus essential 
that provision is made for comprehensive insurance against trial-
related bodily injury.  
 
5 See also 3.5.3 in DoH 2015. 
SA GCP 2020 59
 
10.2.1.2 Sponsors adopt the morally right convention of paying for 
insurance cover for medical treatment in the event of trial-related 
injuries, including death. In South Africa, it is mandatory to have 
adequate comprehensive insurance cover for clinical trials, and 
RECs and regulatory authority should assess that it is in place.  
10.2.1.3 The insurer pays the medical costs of necessary treatment to 
restore the participant to his/her previous position, if possible. 
10.2.1.4 Payment of medical expenses by the insurer is triggered when 
bodily or other injury is attributable to trial participation. In the 
case of an in utero injury due to the mother’s participation, 
payment for medical expenses proceeds as though the unborn child 
is a research participant. 
10.2.1.5 In principle, only bodily injuries of an enduring and disabling 
character (including exacerbation of an existing condition) and/or 
death are covered by the insurance. Temporary pain or discomfort 
or less serious or curable complaints are generally not regarded as 
trial-related bodily injury. In the case of bodily injury caused by the 
response to an AE to a medicinal product under trial, the insurance 
cover will apply. 
10.2.1.6 Payment for medical expenses is made without acknowledgement 
of any legal liability and is thus to be understood to be an ex gratia 
payment. 
10.2.1.7 The provision of insurance cover and payment of medical expenses 
does not mean that an injured participant may not pursue legal 
action against the Sponsor to claim compensation based for 
negligence in a South African court for loss or harm not covered by 
the insurance. However, an argument that pain and suffering, loss 
of income and other possible claims should be paid for by the 
Sponsor’s insurer is not sound in South African law and will not 
succeed.6 
10.2.2 The insurance cover usually does not extend to situations where: 
10.2.2.1 An IP fails to demonstrate its intended effect or to provide any 
other benefit to the participant; 
10.2.2.2 Participants receive placebo which fails to provide a therapeutic 
effect; and 
10.2.2.3 Events occur that are not part of the trial protocol. 
 
10.2.3 Insurance cover may be limited in some instances: 
10.2.3.1 Where bodily injury arises in circumstances that involve: 
a) a significant departure from the approved protocol; 
b) the wrongful act or omission of a third party, including a 
clinician’s failure to deal adequately with an AE; and/or 
c) contributory negligence by the participant,  
 
6 See 3.5.3 in DoH 2015. 
60 SA GCP 2020  
 
the amount paid should be appropriate to the nature, severity and 
persistence of the bodily injury, and should be consistent with the 
amount of damages (compensation) that would ordinarily be 
awarded by a South African court for similar injuries in instances 
where legal liability is admitted. 
10.2.3.2 The amount to be paid may be abated (diminished), or in certain 
circumstances excluded, in light of: 
a) the seriousness of the bodily injury being treated; 
b) the degree of probability that ADRs would occur and the 
warnings given to the participant; and/or 
c) the risks and benefits of established treatments relative to those 
known or suspected of the IP. 
10.2.3.3 The interpretation and weighting of factors depend on the level of 
risk that a participant can reasonably be expected to accept. This 
approach reflects the fact that flexibility is required in relation to a 
particular participant’s circumstances.  
10.2.4 Dispute resolution regarding the amount to be paid: 
10.2.4.1 In a situation where an insurer is willing to pay for medical 
expenses, but a difference of opinion exists between the Sponsor 
and the participant as to the appropriate amount of money to be 
paid, the recommendation is that the Sponsor should seek, as its 
own cost, the opinion of a mutually acceptable independent expert. 
10.2.4.2 This opinion must be provided to the participant in the interest of 
fairness and should be given substantial weight by the Sponsor in 
reaching its decision on the appropriate payment to be made. 
10.2.5 Lodging a claim 
10.2.5.1 A participant who wishes to lodge a claim pursuant to these 
guidelines should deal with the Sponsor, preferably via the PI.  
10.2.5.2 The claim must set out in detail the nature and background to the 
bodily injury. The Sponsor should be permitted to review medical 
records relevant to the claim whereafter the Sponsor should 
process the claim expeditiously.  
10.2.5.3 Ordinarily, when payment is made, a participant will be asked to 
indicate in writing that he/she accepts payment as full settlement 
of the medical expenses claim. However, this undertaking does not 
necessarily rule out legal action on a different basis (see 10.2.1.7 
above).  
NOTE: Insurance against trial-related bodily injury does not replace a 
clinician’s malpractice insurance. 
10.3  PROFESSIONAL INDEMNITY 
All Investigators require comprehensive current professional indemnity (malpractice) 
insurance to cover any claims relating to clinical negligence (i.e. activity not 
attributable to the research). 
SA GCP 2020 61
 
10.4  SPONSOR INDEMNIFICATION 
The Sponsor must indemnify (provide legal and financial cover for) the Investigator 
against claims arising from the trial, excluding claims that arise from malpractice or 
negligence. 
10.5  CONTINUING CARE AFTER RESEARCH (POST TRIAL ACCESS) 
Refer to SAHPRA guideline titled “Post Clinical Trial Access (PTA)/Continued Access” 
dated June 2018 or subsequent updates for details.   
10.6  ASSESSING SAFETY AND MINIMISING RISK  
The informed consent document must explain clearly what to do in the event that an 
ADR is experienced. In the case of a pharmaceutical trial, a DSMB may be appointed, 
if appropriate, to oversee the trial, paying attention to safety, efficacy and interim 
analysis of the data. In the event of clear evidence of efficacy or none (i.e. interim 
results indicate that the IP works or does not work) or of harm to participants (i.e. 
interim results indicate unanticipated AEs) before the end of the trial, premature 
termination of the trial must be recommended by the DSMB on ethical and clinical 
grounds. 
10.7 HUMAN REPRODUCTION CONSIDERATIONS 
10.7.1 Pregnant women, women planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding 
women are usually excluded from human clinical trials where a new 
chemical entity (NCE) or medicines with no information on safety in 
pregnancy/lactation are investigated for treatment of a particular 
disease/condition or disorder.  
10.7.2 Pregnant or breastfeeding women should be included in human clinical trials 
where possible, i.e. when safety and other relevant information is available 
during a clinical trial. This is to ensure that appropriate knowledge about 
NCEs for this group of persons is developed. 
10.7.3 When males and females of childbearing age are to be enrolled in clinical 
trials where medicines known to be harmful or potentially harmful to human 
reproduction organs and pregnancy are to be used, the appropriate 
international and national guidelines regulating such research, should be 
consulted. 
10.8  NEW TECHNOLOGIES  
Human biological materials and their associated data (including images) provide a 
rich source for research materials. An inevitable and unavoidable overlap between 
clinical and research domains prevails: many biological samples are collected during 
clinical interventions for diagnostic purposes, which means that the wish to make 
further use of the samples as research materials has implications for whether and 
how this may occur. Other samples are collected specifically for research purposes.  
Use of human biological materials and their associated data facilitates research in 
new technologies, which include genetic and genomic research, cell and gene 
therapy (CGT). Somatic cell therapy is described as the administration to humans of 
62 SA GCP 2020  
 
autologous, allogeneic or xenogeneic living non-germline cells, other than 
transfusable blood products, which have been manipulated or processed ex vivo with 
the goal of treating or preventing disease, supporting other therapy or diagnosis. 
Germline therapy is currently prohibited across the globe due to safety and ethical 
concerns. 
Genetic information by its very nature is personal, familial and communal. Current 
knowledge and understanding of this information and what can be achieved through 
use thereof are advancing exponentially. However, current ethics and regulatory 
systems are criticised for not providing clear guidance to researchers on how best to 
be enabled to use this rich source of research material.  
The fundamental ethical principles that underpin all research involving with human 
participants apply to proposals to use human biological materials and their 
associated data. Research proposals must address specifically the social value of the 
research especially in the local context; how consent, privacy, confidentiality will be 
managed; and the potential effect on families, communities and other groups. 
Specific concerns include protection of privacy, whether and how incidental findings 
are to be communicated to the person from whom the sample originates. See DoH 
2015 3.3 for further discussion.  
10.9 ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES 
An electronic signature is a computer data compilation of any symbol or series of 
symbols executed, adopted or authorized by an individual to be the legally binding 
equivalent of the individual’s handwritten signature.   In general, a signature may not 
be denied legal effect or validity solely because it is in electronic format, and a 
contract or other record relating to a transaction may not be denied legal effect, 
validity or enforceability solely because an electronic signature or electronic record 
was used in its formation. To be considered equivalent to full handwritten signatures, 
electronic signatures must comply with all applicable requirements under 21 CFR part 
117. Electronic records that are electronically signed must contain information 
associated with the signing that clearly indicates the printed name of the signer, the 
date and time when the signature was executed, and the meaning associated with 
the signature. In addition, electronic signatures and handwritten signatures executed 
to electronic records must be linked to the respective electronic records to ensure 
that the signatures cannot be excised, copied or otherwise transferred to falsify an 
electronic record by ordinary means. 
10.10 THERAPEUTIC MISCONCEPTION AND DUAL ROLES  
10.10.1 
In a treatment context, clinicians must act in the best interests of their 
patients. When a patient becomes a trial participant, this obligation is more 
complex. Necessarily, the trial context has a different focus, i.e. the 
systematic generation of new knowledge within a paradigm that may or 
may not include direct benefit for individual participants. This implies that 
 
7 FDA regulations found in part 11 set forth the criteria under which FDA considers electronic records, 
electronic signatures, and handwritten signatures executed to electronic records to be trustworthy, 
reliable, and generally equivalent to a handwritten signature executed on paper (see CFR 11.1(a)) 
SA GCP 2020 63
 
the best interests of individual participants are not the focus and thus that 
researchers cannot simultaneously act in the best interests of the patient 
to change the trial protocol to suit an individual participant’s interests. 
Instead, the best interest’s criterion must be turned around: the researcher 
must decide whether it would be against the best interest of the patient to 
become or to continue as a trial participant. 
10.10.2 
The researcher must provide sufficient information so that expectations of 
the patient/participant are aligned appropriately to avoid potential 
therapeutic misconception. A therapeutic misconception prevails when a 
patient/participant believes that the primary purpose of a trial procedure or 
intervention is to confer therapeutic benefit on her rather than to generate 
knowledge, thus confusing the purpose of research and the purpose of 
treatment. 
10.10.3 
The dual role played by a clinician/researcher invites ambiguity and 
confusion for both patient and clinician. To prevent therapeutic 
misconception and even deception (intentional or unintentional) of 
participants, careful reflection on the duality of roles is required, and the 
consent process must acknowledge the difference between clinical care 
and clinical trial. 
10.11 CONDUCTING CLINICAL TRIALS DURING A PANDEMIC  
10.11.1   Conducting clinical trials during a pandemic results in a number of 
challenges, such as self-isolation, site closures, travel limitations, 
interruptions to the supply chain for Investigational Product (IP), and other 
considerations if site personnel or study participants become infected. 
These challenges may lead to difficulties in meeting protocol-specific 
procedures, including administration or use of the IP, or adhering to 
protocol-mandated visits and/or laboratory/diagnostic testing. 
10.11.2    The National PI and PI, in collaboration with SAHPRA and the responsible 
Ethics Committee, must provide clarity to help ensure the safety of all 
study participants and site personnel, maintain compliance with GCP, and 
minimize risks to trial integrity during these times. 
 
 
64 SA GCP 2020  
 
11 
REFERENCES 
CIOMS with WHO International Ethical Guidelines for Epidemiological Studies (2009) 
Clinical Trial Compensation Guidelines, Association of British of Pharmaceutical  
Industry (ABPI) Guidelines (2014) 
CFR 21 part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures - Scope and Application 
Guidance for Industry 
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) International 
Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research involving Human Subjects (2016) 
Declaration of Helsinki (2013) 
Department of Health Ethics in Health Research: Principles, Processes and Structures 
2nd edition (2015) (referred to as DoH 2015) 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in 
the Pediatric Population E11 2000 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R2) 
2016 (ICH GCP 2016) 
World Health Organisation WHO Technical Report Series, No. 850 Guidelines for 
good clinical practice (GCP) for trials on pharmaceutical products (1995) 
 
SA GCP 2020 65
 
12 
GLOSSARY 
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR)  
In the preapproval clinical experience with a new medicinal product or its new usages, 
particularly as the therapeutic dose(s) may not be established, all noxious and unintended 
responses to a medicinal product related to any dose should be considered ADRs. The 
phrase “responses to a medicinal product” means that a causal relationship between a 
medicinal product and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e. the 
relationship cannot be ruled out.  
Regarding marketed medicinal products: A response to a drug which is noxious and 
unintended, and which occurs at doses normally used in man for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or 
therapy of diseases or for modification of physiological function (see the ICH Guideline for 
Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting). 
Adverse Event (AE)  
Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical trial participant administered a 
pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this 
treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavourable and unintended sign (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or disease temporally associated with the use of a 
medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational) 
product (see the ICH Guidance for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and 
Standards for Expedited Reporting). 
Amendment (to the protocol)  
See Protocol Amendment.  
Applicant 
An individual, company, institution or organisation that acts on behalf of the Sponsor to 
initiate and manage the trial as its local representative.   
Applicable Regulatory Requirement(s)  
Any law(s) and regulation(s) addressing the conduct of clinical trials of investigational 
products.  
Approval (in relation to Research Ethics Committees (RECs))  
The affirmative decision of the REC that the clinical trial has been reviewed and may be 
conducted at the institution site within the constraints set forth by the REC the institution, 
good clinical practice (GCP) and the applicable regulatory requirements.  
Audit  
A systematic and independent examination of trial-related activities and documents to 
determine whether the evaluated trial-related activities were conducted, and the data were 
recorded, analyzed and accurately reported according to the protocol, Sponsor's standard 
operating procedures (SOPs), good clinical practice (GCP) and the applicable regulatory 
requirement(s).  
Audit Certificate  
A declaration of confirmation by the auditor that an audit has taken place.  
66 SA GCP 2020  
 
Audit Report  
A written evaluation by the Sponsor’s auditor of the results of the audit.  
Audit Trail  
Documentation that allows reconstruction of the course of events.  
Blinding/Masking  
A procedure in which one or more parties to the trial are kept unaware of the treatment 
assignment(s). Single-blinding usually refers to the participant(s) being unaware, and 
doubleblinding usually refers to the participant(s), investigator(s), monitor and, in some 
cases, data analyst(s) being unaware of the treatment assignment(s).  
Care-giver  
Any person other than a parent or guardian, who factually cares for a child and includes: (a) 
a foster parent; (b) a person who cares for a child with implied or express consent of a 
parent or guardian of the child; (c) a person who cares for a child whilst the child is in 
temporary safe care; (d) the person at the head of a child and youth care centre where a 
child has been placed; (e) the person at the head of a shelter; and (f) a child and youth care 
worker who cares for a child who is without appropriate family care in the community. 
Case Report Form (CRF) 
A printed, optical or electronic document designed to record all of the protocol required 
information to be reported to the Sponsor on each trial participant.  
Certified Copy  
A copy (irrespective of the type of media used) of the original record that has been verified 
(i.e. by a dated signature or by generation through a validated process) to have the same 
information, including data that describe the context, content and structure, as the original.  
Clinical Trial/Study  
Any investigation in human participants intended to discover or verify the clinical, 
pharmacological and/or other pharmacodynamic effects of an investigational product(s), 
and/or to identify any adverse reactions to an investigational product(s), and/or to study 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of an investigational product(s) with the 
object of ascertaining its safety and/or efficacy. The terms clinical trial and clinical study are 
synonymous.  
Clinical Trial Agreement  
A written, dated, and signed agreement between two or more involved parties that sets out 
any arrangements on delegation and distribution of tasks and obligations and, if appropriate, 
on financial matters. The protocol may serve as the basis of a contract.  
Clinical Trial/Study Report 
A written description of a trial/study of any therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic agent 
conducted in human participants, in which the clinical and statistical description, 
presentations, and analyses are fully integrated into a single report (see the ICH Guidance 
for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports).  
SA GCP 2020 67
 
Co-Principal Investigator (Co-PI) 
A qualified non-clinician scientist or equivalent qualified and experienced person who can 
provide trial oversight management, and who is jointly and severally liable for the clinical 
trial.   
Comparator (Product) 
 An investigational or marketed product (i.e. active control), or placebo, used as a reference 
in a clinical trial.  
Compliance (in relation to trials) 
Adherence to all the trial-related requirements, good clinical practice (GCP) requirements 
and the applicable regulatory requirements.  
Confidentiality  
Prevention of disclosure, to other than authorized individuals, of a Sponsor’s proprietary 
information or of a participant’s identity.  
Coordinating Committee 
A committee that a Sponsor may organize to coordinate the conduct of a multicentre trial.  
Coordinating Investigator  
An investigator assigned the responsibility for the coordination of investigators at different 
centres participating in a multicentre trial.  
Contract Research Organization (CRO)  
A person or an organization (commercial, academic or other) contracted by the Sponsor to 
perform one or more of a Sponsor's trial-related duties and functions.  
Data Monitoring and Safety Board (DSMB) 
An independent data monitoring committee that may be established by the Sponsor to 
assess at intervals the progress of a clinical trial, the safety data and the critical efficacy 
endpoints, and to recommend to the Sponsor whether to continue, modify or stop a trial. 
Direct Access  
Permission to examine, analyse, verify and reproduce any records and reports that are 
important to evaluation of a clinical trial. Any party (e.g. domestic and foreign regulatory 
authorities, Sponsor’s monitors and auditors) with direct access should take all reasonable 
precautions within the constraints of the applicable regulatory requirement(s) to maintain 
the confidentiality of participants’ identities and sponsor’s proprietary information.  
Documentation  
All records, in any form (including, but not limited to, written, electronic, magnetic and 
optical records and scans, x-rays and electrocardiograms) that describe or record the 
methods, conduct and/or results of a trial, the factors affecting a trial and the actions taken.  
Essential Documents  
Documents that individually and collectively permit evaluation of the conduct of a study and 
the quality of the data produced (see Section 9 “Essential Documents to Conduct a Clinical 
Trial”).  
68 SA GCP 2020  
 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP)  
A standard for the design, conduct, performance, monitoring, auditing, recording, analysis 
and reporting of clinical trials that provides assurance that the data and reported results are 
credible and accurate, and that the rights, integrity and confidentiality of trial participants 
are protected.  
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)  
The part of pharmaceutical quality assurance which ensures that products are consistently 
produced and controlled to the standards appropriate to their intended use and as required 
by the marketing authorization. 
Good Pharmaceutical Practice (GPP)  
The commitment to ensure quality service pharmaceutical services for all, and to promote 
excellence in practice for all that they serve.  
Impartial Witness  
A person, who is independent of the trial, who cannot be unfairly influenced by people 
involved with the trial, who attends the informed consent process if the participant or the 
participant’s legally acceptable representative cannot read, and who reads the informed 
consent form and any other written information supplied to the participant.  
Informed Consent  
A process by which a participant voluntarily confirms his or her willingness to participate in a 
particular trial, after having been informed of all aspects of the trial that are relevant to the 
participant’s decision to participate. Informed consent is documented by means of a written, 
signed and dated informed consent form.  
Inspection  
The act by a regulatory authority of conducting an official review of documents, facilities, 
records and any other resources that are deemed by the authority to be related to the 
clinical trial and that may be located at the site of the trial, at the Sponsor’s and/or Contract 
Research Organization’s (CROs) facilities or at other establishments deemed appropriate by 
the regulatory authority.  
Institution (medical)  
Any public or private entity or agency or medical or dental facility where clinical trials are 
conducted.  
Interim Clinical Trial/Study Report  
A report of intermediate results and their evaluation based on analyses performed during 
the course of a trial.  
Investigational Product  
A pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a 
reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or 
assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when 
used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an 
approved use.  
Investigator  
A person responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a trial site 
SA GCP 2020 69
 
Investigator/Institution  
An expression meaning “the Investigator and/or Institution, where required by the 
applicable regulatory requirements.”  
Investigator’s Brochure  
A compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the investigational product(s) that is 
relevant to the study of the investigational product(s) in human participants. 
Legally Acceptable Representative  
An individual or juridical or other body authorized under applicable law to consent, on behalf 
of a prospective participant, to the participant’s participation in the clinical trial.  
Monitoring  
The act of overseeing the progress of a clinical trial, and of ensuring that it is conducted, 
recorded and reported in accordance with the protocol, standard operating procedures 
(SOPs), GCP and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
Monitoring Plan  
A document that describes the strategy, methods, responsibilities and requirements for 
monitoring the trial. 
Monitoring Report  
A written report from the monitor to the Sponsor after each site visit and/or other trial-
related communication according to the Sponsor’s SOPs.  
Multicentre Trial  
A clinical trial conducted according to a single protocol but at more than one site, and 
therefore, carried out by more than one Investigator.  
National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC) 
The body with the overall responsibility to promote, ensure and monitor compliance by 
Research Ethics Committees (RECs) in South Africa with relevant legislation, regulations and 
guidelines. In so doing, the NHREC will accredit and audit the performance of RECs.  
Participant 
An individual who participates in a clinical trial, either as a recipient of the investigational
product(s) or as a control.  
Participation Identification Code  
A unique identifier assigned by the Investigator to each trial participant to protect the
participant’s identity and used in lieu of the participant’s name when the Investigator reports
adverse events and/or other trial-related data.  
 
Pre-clinical Study 
Biomedical studies not performed on human participants.  
Protocol 
A document that describes the objective(s), design, methodology, statistical considerations 
and organization of a trial. The protocol usually also gives the background and rationale for 
the trial, but these could be provided in other protocol referenced documents. Throughout 
the ICH GCP Guidance, the term protocol refers to protocol and protocol amendments.  
70 SA GCP 2020  
 
Protocol Amendment 
A written description of a change(s) to or formal clarification of a protocol.  
Quality Assurance 
All those planned and systematic actions that are established to ensure that the trial is 
performed and the data are generated, documented (recorded) and reported in compliance 
with GCP and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
Quality Control 
The operational techniques and activities undertaken within the quality assurance system to 
verify that the requirements for quality of the trial-related activities have been fulfilled.  
Randomization 
The process of assigning trial participants to treatment or control groups using an element 
of chance to determine the assignments in order to reduce bias.  
Regulatory Authorities  
Bodies having the power to regulate. In the ICH GCP guidance, the expression “Regulatory 
Authorities” includes the authorities that review submitted clinical data and those that 
conduct inspections. These bodies are sometimes referred to as competent authorities.  
Research Ethics Committee (REC) 
An independent body constituted of medical, scientific, and non-scientific members, whose 
responsibility is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety and well-being of human 
participants involved in a trial by, among other things, reviewing, approving and providing 
continuing review of trial protocols and amendments and of the methods and material to be 
used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial participants.  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (Serious ADR)  
Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death, is life-threatening, 
requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in 
persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
Source Data  
All information in original records and certified copies of original records of clinical findings, 
observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and 
evaluation of the trial. Source data are contained in source documents (original records or 
certified copies).  
Source Document  
Original documents, data, and records (e.g., hospital records, clinical and office charts, 
laboratory notes, memoranda, participants’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or transcriptions 
certified after verification as being accurate copies, microfiches, photographic negatives, 
microfilm or magnetic media, x-rays, participant files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at 
the laboratories and at medico-technical departments involved in the clinical trial).  
Sponsor 
An individual, company, institution or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, 
management and/or financing of a clinical trial.  
SA GCP 2020 71
 
Sponsor-Investigator  
An individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under 
whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or 
used by a participant. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it 
does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a Sponsor-Investigator 
include both those of a Sponsor and those of an Investigator.  
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)  
Detailed, written instructions to achieve uniformity of the performance of a specific function.  
Sub-Investigator  
Any individual member of the clinical trial team designated and supervised by the 
investigator at a trial site to perform critical trial-related procedures and/or to make 
important trial-related decisions (e.g. associates, registrars, research fellows).  
Trial Site  
The location(s) where trial-related activities are actually conducted.  
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction  
An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable 
product information (e.g. Investigator’s Brochure for an unapproved investigational product 
or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product).  
Validation of Computerized Systems  
A process of establishing and documenting that the specified requirements of a 
computerized system can be consistently fulfilled from design until decommissioning of the 
system or transition to a new system. The approach to validation should be based on a risk 
assessment that takes into consideration the intended use of the system and the potential of 
the system to affect human participant protection and reliability of trial results. 
Vulnerable Participants  
Individuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the 
expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a 
retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. 
Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, 
dental and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of 
the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces and persons kept in detention. 
Other vulnerable participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing 
homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic 
minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors and those incapable of giving 
consent.  
Well-being (of the trial participants)  
The physical and mental integrity of the participants participating in a clinical trial.  
