SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    1
May 2025
BIOLOGICAL MEDICINES AMENDMENT GUIDELINES
Document History
Final 
Version
Reason for Amendment
Effective Date
1
First publication for comments
June 2017
2
Published for implementation
July 2019
3
Revised version published for comments
14 August 2020
4
Published for Implementation
05 March 2021
5
Administrative and editorial updates, e.g., the use of new guideline
template, change in guideline number from 2.61 to SAHPGL-PEM- BIO-
05, update of table of contents and minor changes to numbering
sequence of headings
07 September 2022
6
Editorial changes and inclusion of the variation codes and procedure
for the submission of the COVID-19 vaccine strain update
May 2025
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
This guideline document is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit amendments for
registered biological medicines. It represents the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority’s (SAHPRA) current
thinking on ensuring the safety, quality and therapeutic efficacy of medicines. It is not intended as an exclusive approach.
SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality and therapeutic efficacy
of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. Alternative approaches may be used, but
these should be scientifically and technically justified. It is important that applicants adhere to the administrative
requirements to avoid delays in the processing and evaluation of applications.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    2
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Contents
Document History...................................................................................................................................................1
GLOSSARY.......................................................................................................................................................... 3
1.
INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................................................... 9
2.
SCOPE...................................................................................................................................................... 10
3.
LEGAL PROVISION......................................................................................................................................10
4.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.........................................................................................................................10
5.
REPORTING CATEGORIES FOR QUALITY CHANGES.....................................................................................12
5.1 Type II amendments.....................................................................................................................................12
5.2 Type IB amendments....................................................................................................................................13
5.3 Type IA amendments....................................................................................................................................13
5.4 Type IAIN  a m e n d m e n t s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 
6.
AMENDMENT TYPE FOR SAFETY, EFFICACY AND/OR PRODUCT LABELLING INFORMATION CHANGES . 1 4 
7
PROCEDURES........................................................................................................................................... 14
7.1 Procedures for Amendments.......................................................................................................................15
7.2 Procedures for Type IA amendments..........................................................................................................17
7.3 “Z” Codes:...................................................................................................................................................18
8.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS.........................................................................................................................18
8.1. Adjuvants.................................................................................................................................................18
8.2. Annual Viral Strain Changes for Influenza Vaccines....................................................................................18
8.2.1
Introduction....................................................................................................................................19
8.2.2
Time for submission..............................................................................................................................19
8.2.3
Information and documentation required..........................................................................................19
8.3    Bridging Studies............................................................................................................................................20
8.4 Approach for the submission of the applications for COVID-19 strains update:.......................................21
9. REFERENCES................................................................................................................................................ 21
10. APPENDIX 1: REPORTING CATEGORIES......................................................................................................23
11. APPENDIX 2: POST APPROVAL CHANGES TO THE ACTIVE BIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE..................................24
12
APPENDIX 3: POST APPROVAL CHANGES TO THE FINAL PRODUCT............................................................52
13. APPENDIX 4: (Q) D. PLASMA MASTER FILE (PMF) / VACCINE ANTIGEN MASTER FILE (VAMF)..................91
14. APPENDIX 5: FORMAT OF COVER PAGE.......................................................................................................97
15. VALIDITY................................................................................................................................................ 104
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    3
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
GLOSSARY
ABBREVIATION
MEANING
BSE
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
CP
Comparability Protocol
CTD
Common Technical Document (ICH)
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
eCTD
Electronic Common Technical Document
GCP
Good Clinical Practice
GLP
Good Laboratory Practice
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
HCR
Holder of the Certificate of Registration
ICH
International Council for Harmonization
HPLC
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
MCB
Master Cell Bank
NRA
National Regulatory Authority
PAA
Prior Approval Amendment
PI
Professional Information
PIL
Patient Information Leaflet
QC
Quality Control
SAHPRA
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
SOP
Standard Operating Procedures
TSE
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy
WCB
Working Cell Bank
WHO
World Health Organisation
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    4
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
DEFINITIONS
Some of the definitions below were modified (compared to those provided in other documents) to reflect the 
meanings as used in this guidance.
TERM
MEANING
Adjuvant
A substance or combination of substances used in conjunction with
a biological medicine to achieve (for example, increase, accelerate,
prolong and/or possibly target) or modulate a specific physiological
or immune response to the biological in order to enhance the
clinical effectiveness of the biological medicine.
Amendment
An application for a change in the original registration application,
submitted to SAHPRA per applicable guidelines.
Antigen (vaccine)
The following definitions apply in this document:
•
The active ingredient in a vaccine against which the
immune response is raised. It may be a live attenuated
preparation of bacteria, viruses or parasites; inactivated
(killed) whole organisms; crude cellular fractions or
purified
active
biological
ingredients,
including
recombinant
proteins
(i.e.,
those
derived
from
recombinant
DNA
expressed
in
a
host
cell);
polysaccharides and conjugates formed by covalent
linkage of polysaccharides to components such as mutated
or inactivated proteins and/or toxoids; synthetic active
biological ingredients; polynucleotides (such as plasmid
DNA vaccines); or living vectored cells expressing specific
heterologous immunogens. It may also be a combination
of the antigens or immunogens listed above.
•
Intermediate or component that may undergo chemical
change or processing in the manufacture of the final
product (drug product) and is present in the final product
in amodified form intended to furnish the specified activity
or effect. Also referred to as Drug Substance, Active
Ingredient, or Active Substance in other documents.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    5
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Biological Medicine
All medicines that contain a living organism or are derived from a
living organism or biological processes. They include, but are not
limited to the following:
i.
Plasma-derived and animal products e.g. Clotting
factors, immunosera, antivenoms
ii.
Vaccines
iii.
Biotechnology-derived medicines (recombinant
DNA products), for e.g., rHu-anti-haemophilic
factors,
hormones,
cytokines,
enzymes,
monoclonal antibodies, erythropoietins, nucleic
acids
iv.
Products developed for Human Gene therapy
Well-characterised, low-molecular mass, medicinal biological
compounds, may be excluded by specific regulatory decisions from
the biological medicine status, and in that case, will not be
reviewed through the biological medicines review process.
Change
Refers to any change made to an approved marketing authorisation in
product composition, active and non-active ingredients, manufacturing
process, quality controls, equipment, containers, shelf life, storage
conditions, facilities or product labelling information by the marketing
authorisation holder. This is also referred to as a variation in other
documents.
Comparability 
Exercise
The activities, including study design, conduct of studies, and
evaluation of data, that are designed to investigate whether the
products are comparable. In addition to routine analyses
performed during production and control of the active biological
ingredient or final product, these evaluations typically include
further characterisation studies. In some cases, non-clinical or
clinical data might contribute to the conclusion.
Comparability 
Protocol (CP)
The CP establishes the tests to be done and acceptable limits to be
achieved to demonstrate comparability of the pre-amendment
and
post-amendment
products
following
specific
quality
change(s). A CP is a highly specific, a well-defined plan for the
future implementation of a quality (e.g., manufacturing-related
changes, change of analytical methodand site transferchange. Itis
also referred to as Post Approval Change Management Protocol in
other documents.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Container Closure 
System
This system refers to the following components:
•
A primary container closure system is a packaging
component that is or may be in direct contact with the final
product dosage form (e.g., vial, pre-filled syringe).
(Container closure systems for the active biological
ingredients or intermediates of medicines normally only
include primary container closure systems.)
•
A secondary container closure system is a packaging
component that is not and will not be in direct contact with
the dosage form (e.g. carton, tray).
Dosage Form
This is the pharmaceutical form in which the active ingredients, 
excipients and physical formulation of a medicine is presented.
Final Lot
A collection of sealed final containers that are homogeneous with
respect to the composition of the product. A final lot must
therefore have been filled in one continuous working session.
Final Product
A finished dosage form (e.g. tablet or solution) that contains an
active ingredient generally, but not necessarily, in association with
inactive ingredients. It is also referred to as a Finished Product or
Drug Product in other documents.
Formulated bulk
An intermediate in the drug product manufacturing process,
consisting of the final formulation of drug substance and excipients
at the concentration to be filled into primary containers.
Holder of the 
Certificate of 
Registration (HCR)
An HCR refers to a person or legal entity in whose name a
registrationcertificate has been granted and who is responsible for
all aspects of the medicine, including quality, safety and
compliance with conditions of registration.
Intermediate
A material produced during steps in the manufacturing of a
medicine that must undergo further processing before it becomes
a final product.
Manufacturer
This refers to a person manufacturing a medicine and includes a
manufacturing pharmacy.
Master cell bank 
(MCB)
An MCB is an aliquot of a single pool of cells, which generally has
been prepared from the selected cell clone under defined
conditions, dispensed into multiple containers and stored under
defined conditions.
Prior approval 
amendment (PAA)
A PAA is an amendment requiring approval from the SAHPRA prior
to implementation of the amendment. Also referred to as change
application dossier in other documents.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    7
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Product Labelling 
Information
Printed materials that accompany a prescription medicine and
refer to all labelling items as per the Medicines and Related
Substances Act, 101 of 1965, General Regulations # 10, #11 and #
12):
•
Professional
Information
(PI),
including
prescribing
information,
that
provides
product
information
on
indication, dosage and administration, safety and efficacy
results, contraindications, warnings, and a description of
the product for health care providers
•
Inner label or container label
•
Outer label or carton
•
Patient Information Leaflet (PIL)
Quality attribute
 A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or 
characteristic.
Quality change
In the context of this document, quality change refers to a change
in the manufacturing process, product composition, quality
control testing, equipment or facility.
Raw materials
A general term used to denote the culture media components,
reagents or solvents intended for use in the production of starting
material, drug substance, intermediates or drug products.
Registration 
Application
A formal application to SAHPRA for approval to register and
market a new medicine. The purpose of the Registration
Application is to determine whether the medicine meets the
statutory standards for safety, effectiveness, product labelling
information and manufacturing.
Source 
material/starting 
material
Material from a biological source that marks the beginning of the
manufacturing process of a drug as described in a marketing
authorisation or licence application and from which the active
ingredient is derived either directly (e.g., plasma derivatives,
ascitic fluid, bovine lung, etc.) or indirectly (e.g., cell substrates,
host/vector production cells, eggs, viral strains, etc.).
Specification
A list of tests, references to analytical procedures, and
appropriate acceptance criteria which are numerical limits, ranges
or other criteria for the tests described. Specifications are critical
quality standards that are proposed and justified by the
manufacturer and approved by the regulatory authorities.
Vaccine
Preparations containing antigens capable of inducing a specific 
and active immunity in humans against an infectious agent or 
toxin.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    8
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Vaccine Efficacy
Relative reduction in disease incidence in vaccinated people
compared to unvaccinated people measured in a randomised,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. In the context of this guidance
document, medicine efficacy relates to all clinical data obtained
to ensure medicine efficacy, immunogenicity or its effectiveness.
Working Cell Bank 
(WCB)
The WCB is prepared from aliquots of a homogeneous suspension
of cells obtained from culturing the master cell bank under defined
culture conditions.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page    9
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
1.
INTRODUCTION
Often, changes to the manufacturing process or labelling information need to be implemented after a biological
medicine has been submitted for registration or approved (i.e. registered). Changes may be made for a variety of
reasons: e.g. to improve the quality and/or the efficiency of manufacture (e.g., changes in the manufacturing
process, equipment, facility), or to update safety and efficacy changes and/or product labelling information (e.g.,
add a new indication, improve the management of risk by adding a warning, limiting the target population or
changing the dosage regime).  It is accepted that:
a)
any change to the process or packaging of a biological medicine may impact the quality, safety, 
and therapeutic efficacy of a registered medicine; and
b)
any change to the labelling information of a registered medicine may impact the safe and 
effective use of the same.
SAHPRA has a responsibility to evaluate and approve any post-registration change that may affect the quality,
safety or therapeutic efficacy of a registered medicine.
The Holder of the Certificate of Registration (HCR) is responsible for submitting an amendment application for
SAHPRA approval or notifying SAHPRA of all manufacturing or labelling changes to a registeredbiologicalmedicine.
Priortoimplementingthechange,theHCRormanufacturershouldassess the effects of the change and demonstrate
through appropriate studies (validation and/or analytical and/or clinical or non-clinical laboratory studies) the lack
of an adverse effect of the change on the quality, safety and therapeutic efficacy of the medicine.
Regulation of changes to medicines is one of the most important elements which ensures that medicines of constant
quality, safety and therapeutic efficacy are distributed post-authorisation. It is difficult to provide a set of guidelines
that apply to all situations. However, in this guideline, an attempt has been made to cover a range of possible
changes to manufacture, quality control, safety, therapeutic efficacy, and product labelling information.
The categories of changes and reporting procedures are provided in the main body of the document and the data
requirements to support the proposed changes are provided in the appendices.
This guideline has been informed by the existing SAHPRA variation addendum for Human and Veterinary Medicines
[2.08], European Union (EU) variation classification guidelines and the World Health Organisation (WHO) Guideline
for procedures and data requirements for changes to approved vaccine (TRS 993 Annex-4 2015).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    10
2.
SCOPE
This document provides guidance to HCRs who intend to make changes to the original product registration for an
approved biological medicine on:
a)
procedures and criteria for the appropriate categorisation and reporting of changes; and
b)
the data required to enable SAHPRA to evaluate the impact of the change on the quality, safety and 
efficacy of the medicine.
This guideline document mainly covers quality-related changes for biological medicines. However, there are a few
administrative changes relating to Vaccine Antigen Master File (VAMF) and Plasma Master File (PMF) which are
covered by these guidelines. For other administrative changes, safety changes, efficacy changes and product
labelling changes (PI/PIL), the applicant must use the latest SAHPRA variation addendum published on the SAHPRA
website (https://www.sahpra.org.za/). Section 6 of this guideline document outlines the exceptions that applies to
biological medicines for safety, efficacy and/or product labelling information changes.
3.
LEGAL PROVISION
Medicines and Related Substances Act, 101 of 1965, as amended and the relevant Regulations.
4.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
For each change, the HCR should decide if the information in the original application or product registration
application needs to be amended and requires an official submission to SAHPRA (i.e., an amendment application)
based on the recommendations in this guideline. The HCR is responsible for the assessment of the effects of any
change before implementing the change.
Amendments requiring approval prior to implementation of a change are referred to as Prior Approval
Amendments (PAA). In general, no change should be implemented without approval of SAHPRA unless it is
exempted in this guideline.
Changes to approved biological medicines are categorised based on a risk analysis. When the change affects the
manufacturing process, this assessment should include evaluation of the effect of the change on the quality (i.e.,
identity, strength, quality, purity, and potency) of the final product as it may relate to the safety or efficacy of the
medicine.
Changes that may potentially have a major or moderate impact require submission of a prior approval
amendment to SAHPRA.
For each change, the HCR’s amendment application should contain information determined by SAHPRA to be
appropriate and should include the information developed by the HCR in assessing the effects of the change. A
manufacturer making a change to a biological medicine should also conform to other applicable laws and
regulations, including good manufacturing practices (GMP), good laboratory practices (GLP), good clinical practices
(GCP) and other applicable regulations. For example, manufacturers should comply with relevant GMP validation
and record-keeping requirements and ensure that relevant records are readily available for examination by
authorised SAHPRA personnel during inspections. Inspections may occur routinely or may be triggered by major
manufacturing changes (e.g., substantial change in production capacity, move to a new facility).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    11
An assessment of the extent to which the quality change (also referred to as manufacturing change) affects the
quality attributes (i.e., identity, strength, quality, purity, potency) of a biological medicine, is typically accomplished
by comparing manufacturing steps test results from in-process, release and characterisation testing of pre-change
(e.g. historical data) and post-change material and determining if the test results are comparable (i.e., active
ingredients, intermediate or final product made after the change should be shown to be comparable to and/or to
meet the acceptance criteria of the active ingredients, intermediates or final product made before the change). In
the case that minor differences are acceptable, provided they are shown not to have an adverse impact on quality,
safety and therapeutic efficacy of the product.
Certain changes, such as changes in the composition of active ingredients, the introduction of new vaccine antigens
(except for the annual influenza virus strain update of influenza vaccines), the use of new cell substrates (i.e. use
of cells unrelated to the established master cell bank (MCB) or pre-master cell bank material or changes in the
composition of key excipients are generally considered to be a new product and as such require the submission of
a new registration application.)
Cell substrate-related changes, such as re-derivation of the MCB, may require the submission of a new registration
application, whether the cells are used as a substrate for propagation or organisms or constitute the active
biological ingredient itself (e.g. a new MCB generated from a different isolate).
Administrative changes related to acquisitions and mergers, company names, or contact information should be
submitted directly to SAHPRA as a general correspondence to the registration certificate and evaluated by
SAHPRA’s Inspectorate Unit. [See Section 6, Reporting Categories for Safety, Efficacy and/or Product Labelling
Information Changes for information on changes to the labelling items.]
In the case where a change has been approved by any of the regulatory authorities with which SAHPRA aligns itself,
SAHPRA may choose to recognise the decision or make an independent decision based on SAHPRA’s assessment.
Foreign approval documentation may accompany the required information to support the change as outlined in
this document. The responsibility of the final regulatory decision on the approval of the change still lies with
SAHPRA. SAHPRA may consider establishing procedures on the recognition of approvals for the same changes by
any of the regulatory authorities with which SAHPRA aligns itself to.
Descriptions of the reporting categories for quality changes are provided for in Section 5 and for safety, therapeutic
efficacy and product labelling information changes in Section 6. Proposed recommendations on the regulatory
procedures for the reporting of changes to SAHPRA are described in Section 7. Examples of suggested review
timelines for changes in the various categories are included under Appendix 1.
A comprehensive list of quality changes and the type of information that should be included in an amendment
application are provided in Appendix 2 for the active biological ingredient and intermediates, Appendix 3 for the
final product and Appendix 4 for Plasma Master File.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    12
5.
REPORTING CATEGORIES FOR QUALITY CHANGES
Based on the potential effect of the quality change (e.g. manufacturing change) on the quality attributes (i.e.,
identity, strength, quality controls, purity, potency) of the medicine and on their potential impact on the quality,
safety or efficacy, changes are categorized into major changes (Type II amendments), moderate changes (Type IB
amendments,) and minor changes (Type IA amendments)
All changes are identified as:

Type II amendments

Type IB amendments

Type IA amendments

Type IAIN  amendments
The implementation of all Type II and Type IB amendments requires reporting to SAHPRA in order to amend the
information in the original registration application. The Type II amendments must be reviewed and approved by
SAHPRA prior to implementation. Minor amendments of Type IAIN require immediate notification to SAHPRA. Type
IA amendments may be implemented by HCR without prior approval from SAHPRA. However, a notification of this
implementation should be provided to SAHPRA within 12 months of implementation. Following the receipt of
notification for Type IA and Type IAIN amendments, SAHPRA will review the notification and provide feedback to
the HCR within 30 days. Further information on each amendment is provided below:
•
Appendices 2 and 3 provide an extensive list of Type II, Type IB, and Type IA changes, including the 
information required to support each change.
•
Appendix 2 includes changes to the active biological substance or intermediates and Appendix 3 includes
changes to the final product. If a quality change has a potential impact on the quality, safety and
therapeutic efficacy of the medicine and is considered to be a Type II, Type IB, or Type IA amendment, but
is not included in Appendix 2, 3 or 4, then the amendment should be submitted as “Z” code [see section
7.3].
SAHPRA will establish a mechanism that allows for the update of this guideline when new regulatory category
classifications are needed.
5.1
Type II amendments
Type II amendments are changes to the product composition, manufacturing process, quality controls, facilities, or
equipment that have a potential to have a significant negative or positive impact on the quality, safety or efficacy
of the biological medicine. The HCR should submit an application for Type II amendment and receive an approval
notification from SAHPRA before implementation of the change by the manufacturer. For a change under this
category, the amendment application should specify the products involved and include a detailed description of
the proposed change. Additional supportive information is also needed as per Appendix 2 for the active biological
substance and Appendix 3 for the final product.
Additional information may include information such as: a description of the methods used, and studies performed
to evaluate the effect of the change on the product's safety or efficacy; the data derived from those studies; relevant
validation protocols and results; updated product labelling information; and summaries of relevant standard
operating procedure(s) (SOP) or a list referencing previously approved relevant SOP. In some cases, Type II
amendments may also require non-clinical and/or clinical data.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    13
The recommendations in the World Health Organisation (WHO) Guidelines on nonclinical evaluation of vaccines
[4], Guidelines on clinical evaluation of vaccines: regulatory expectations [5], Guidelines on stability evaluation of
vaccines [6], other related guidelines [7-10] and recommendations for specific products and adjuvants, e.g., WHO’s
Guidelines on the quality, safety and efficacy of bio-therapeutic protein products prepared by recombinant DNA
technology (16), should apply.
5.2
Type IB amendments
Type IB amendments are changes to the product composition, manufacturing process, quality controls, facilities,
or equipment, that have a moderate potential to have an impact on the quality, safety or therapeutic efficacy of
the medicine.
The HCR should submit a Type IB amendment application to SAHPRA. SAHPRA will check within seven (7) working
days whether the proposed change can be considered a Type IB amendment, and whether the classification of the
amendment is correct and complete (‘validation’) before issuing the acknowledgement of receipt. Thus, within 60
working days following the acknowledgement of receipt of a valid Type IB amendment application, SAHPRA will
notify the HCR of the outcome of the evaluation procedure. However, if SAHPRA does not send the HCR the
outcome of its evaluation within 60 working days following the acknowledgement of receipt for the Type IB
amendment, then the Type IB amendment will be deemed acceptable.
5.3
Type IA amendments
Type IA amendments are changes to the product composition, manufacturing process, quality controls, facilities,
or equipment that have a minimal potential to have an impact on the safety or efficacy of the medicine. Type IA
amendments are implementable by the HCR. However, SAHPRA should be notified of the changes within 12 months
of implementation. Following receipt of such notification, SAHPRA will review the notification for Type IA
amendments within 30 working days and provide evaluation outcome to the HCR.
The justification and supporting documentation for Type IA amendment should be submitted with the notification
and should also be made available by HCR upon request from SAHPRA. When Type IA affects the lot release
specifications (e.g., narrowing of a specification, or compliance with pharmacopoeial changes) and affects the
quality control testing as summarised in the lot release protocol, the HCR should inform the institution responsible
for reviewing the release of lots. Type IA amendments that are related to Type IB or Type II changes should be
included in the application for Type IB or Type II amendments.
5.4
Type IAIN  amendments
Type IAIN amendments are minor amendments of Type IA that require immediatenotification toSAHPRA. Following
receipt of notification, SAHPRA will review the notification for Type IAIN amendment within 30 working days and
provide the evaluation outcome to the HCR.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    14
6.
AMENDMENT TYPE FOR SAFETY, EFFICACY AND/OR PRODUCT LABELLING
INFORMATION CHANGES
6.1. 
For safety, efficacy and/or product labelling information changes, SAHPRA variations addendum
for human and veterinary medicines specifically Section 4.1 (Clinical and Pharmacovigilance), 5.1
(General) and 5.2 (Clinical and Pharmacovigilance) is also applicable for biological medicines. Thus,
all relevant C.I codes will apply to biological medicines as they do for small molecules. However,
the following exceptions with respect to codes and Type IB amendments timelines will apply for
Biological Medicines:
6.1.1
Exception 1 > Clinical codes: All clinical codes must be preceded by the alphabet (Q). This will ensure
that the amendment application is routed correctly to the Biological Medicines Unit.
6.2
All biological clinical variations should be submitted separately from quality variations.
7.
PROCEDURES
The establishment of procedures and criteria for adequate oversight of changes to the registered medicine is the
responsibility of SAHPRA. As such, SAHPRA has established this guideline regarding the submission procedures and
timelines to be considered by HCRs when preparing to submit an amendment for a change.
Because Type II amendments or Efficacy and Safety amendments require extensive documentation and data, the
review times will be longer than for Type IB, Type IA amendments or Product Labelling Information amendments.
Furthermore, SAHPRA may establish different timelines for reviews of Type II amendments not requiring clinical
data, compared to Safety and Efficacy amendments requiring clinical data.
See Appendix 1 for examples of regulatory categories and review timelines.
In the case where SAHPRA decides to recognise the approval of any of the regulatory authorities with which
SAHPRA aligns itself, timelines may not apply.
HCRs may also consult with SAHPRAon the adequacy of clinical data required to support a Safety, Efficacy or Product
Labelling Information Change.
To aid in the acceptance of submissions for review, the cover letter to an amendment for a manufacturing change
should specify that the amendment is being reported in the selected category by labelling the submission as:
•
Type II amendment, or
•
Type IB amendment, or
•
Type IA
•
Type IAIN
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    15
Type II amendments that contain both quality data and revised product labelling information but no clinical data
should be labelled Type II quality and Product Labelling Information amendment, and the cover letter should
specify that the submission includes both quality changes and revised product labelling information items. Type II
amendments that contain safety and efficacy data (from clinical studies) and revised product Labelling information,
should be labelled Type II Safety and Efficacy amendment, and the cover letter should specify that the submission
includes supporting clinical data and revised product labelling information items.
All amendment applications should include a list of all the changes contained in the submission. The list should
describe each change with sufficient detail to allow SAHPRA to speedily determine whether the appropriate
reporting category has been used and should be part of the cover letter. If the submission has been inappropriately
classified, the HCR will be notified.
7.1
Procedures for Amendments
The following common items should be included, where applicable, in the submission package for post approval
changes:
a)
A cover letter (Module 1.0) that includes:
i
the type of submission (e.g., Type II amendment, Type IB, Type IA )
ii
a narrative of the change(s) and a rationale for the change(s)
iii
any other information relevant to the submission; and IV. an indication of the general type of 
supporting data
b)
Completed documents or forms based on SAHPRA requirements such as: Medicines Submission 
Application Form (Module 1.2.1) signed and dated
c)
GMP documentation information (Module 1.7), as applicable
d)
Where relevant, a side-by-side comparison showing the differences between the approved
manufacturing process (including quality control tests) compared to the proposed ones (Module 1.5.2.1)
In addition to the above common information, the specific information to support the various quality changes is
outlined in Appendices 3, 4 and 5. It should be noted that the common information is not repeated for the various
changes outlined in the appendices. All data recommended to support a change should be provided with the
submission. When recommended supporting data cannot be submitted, a detailed rationale should be provided.
For submissions that include multiple changes, the applicant should clearly specify which supporting data support
each change.
If the same change is applicable to multiple products, a separate submission is generally required for each product,
butthedatamaybecross-referenced. Whencross-referencesaremadetopreviouslysubmitted information, details
on the cross-referenced information should be indicated in the covering letter (e.g., brand name of the product,
manufacturer's/HCR's
name,
submission
type,
application
number,
date
approved).
Submission filed in electronic format (ZA eCTD) or e-submission (ZA CTD) should be based on the current
requirements of SAHPRA. The submitted data should be well organised and should be provided in the format
defined by SAHPRA.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    16
If SAHPRA determines that the information submitted in an amendment fails to demonstrate the continued quality,
safety or efficacy of the product made with the change, it will try to resolve the problems with the HCR. In such
cases, SAHPRA will issue an information request letter for additional documentation, information and clarification
to be submitted by the HCR. If the identified deficiencies are not resolved and may have a negative impact on the
product, SAHPRA may decide to issue a written non-compliance letter by which the change cannot be implemented,
and the product made with the amendments cannot be distributed.
If the information in the amendment is adequate and all identified deficiencies are resolved in a satisfactory
manner, SAHPRA will issue a written approval notification. Regarding the resolution of conflicts or disputes
between SAHPRA and the HCR, the Act 101 (1965) provides procedures for review and appeal of decisions.
The following points should be considered when submitting changes:
•
Comparability Protocol
A comparability protocol (also referred to as post approval change management protocol in other documents)
establishes a framework for a well-defined plan for the future implementation of a quality change, the tests to be
done and acceptable limits to be achieved to demonstrate the lack of negative effect for specific manufacturing
changes on the quality, safety or therapeutic efficacy of the medicine. A comparability protocol is a highly specific,
well-defined plan for the future implementation of a quality change. For some changes the routine quality tests
performed to release active biological ingredient or final product are not considered adequate to assess the impact
of the change and additional in-process tests and characterisation tests may be needed (e.g., addition of bioburden
and endotoxin tests to support the removal of preservatives from the manufacturing process).
The purpose of a comparability protocol is to allow for a more expedient distribution of products by permitting MA
holders to submit a protocol for a change, which if approved, may justify a reduced reporting category for the
particular change at the time the comparability data are obtained, and the change is implemented. This concept is
not included in this guidance as the use of the comparability protocol is not currently harmonised amongst NRAs.
It is the decision of the NRA whether or not to include the review and approval of comparability protocols in their
approach to regulating changes to approved medicines. Currently, SAHPRA does not have a mechanism for
reviewing and approving a comparability protocol. Nonetheless this may change in the future. For those NRAs
currently taking this approach, a new comparability protocol, or a change to an existing one, requires submission
of an amendment and approval prior to implementation because it may result in a decreased reporting category
for the changes covered in the comparability protocol after the actual comparability data are submitted. The
change of reporting category for the comparability protocol vs the comparability data should be established by the
NRA at the time the comparability exercise is approved.

Multiple Changes
Multiple related changes involving various combinations of individual changes may be submitted in the same
amendment application. For example, a site change may also involve equipment and manufacturing process
changes, or a medicine component change may necessitate a change in a specification. For multiple related changes
where the recommended reporting categories for the individual changes differ, the submission should be in
accordance with the most restrictive of the categories recommended for the individual changes. For submissions
that include multiple changes, the HCR should clearly specify which supporting data support which change.
Multiple Type II amendments or Type IB amendments for the same medicine may be filed in a single submission
provided those changes are related and/or supported by the same information. Any other category of changes
(e.g., Type IA amendments and Administrative Product Labelling Information Changes) may be filed together with
other submissions whether or not they are related and/or supported by the same information. If the changes are
related, the HCR should indicate the association between the proposed changes. Such changes could affect both
the active biological ingredient and the final product. If there are too many changes filed within the same
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    17
submission or major issues are identified with a change which would require extensive time to review, SAHPRA
may ask the HCR to divide the changes into separate submissions and resubmit the file. As indicated above, if the
recommended reporting categories for the individual changes differ, the submission should be in accordance with
the most restrictive of the categories recommended for the individual changes. In case of numerous changes of the
same category, SAHPRA may reclassify the submission to the next higher level based on the potential impact of the
sum of the changes on the quality, safety and efficacy of the medicine. This reclassification should be
communicated
to
the
HCR
at
the
start
of
the
assessment.

Production Documents
Production documents (executed lot records) are not required at the time of filing to support post-approval
changes. However, these may be requested during review and should be available upon request and during
inspections.
7.2
Procedures for Type IA amendments
Type IA amendments are implementable by the HCR. However, SAHPRA should be notified of the changes within 12
months of implementation. The relevant supporting documents for Type IA amendments are outlined in
Appendices2-4. TypeIAamendmentsthathavepreviouslybeenimplementedandarerelated and/or consequential
to a Type IB or II amendment should be described in the relevant parts of the documentation when applying for
the Type IB or II amendments. If SAHPRA determines (during an inspection or a review of related changes) that the
information for the change fails to demonstrate the continued safety or efficacy of the product manufactured using
thechanges,SAHPRAmayworktoresolve the problem with the HCR. If SAHPRA finds that the product in distribution
poses a danger to public health, or if it determines that there are unresolved issues, it may require the HCR to
cease distribution of the product manufactured using the changes or to remove the product from distribution
pending resolution of the issues related to the changes.
7.3
“Z” Codes
Applicants can submit "z" code variations for unforeseen changes not accounted for in this guideline. The “z” code
should be classified according to latest SAHPRA BAU variations communication.
8.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
8.1.
Adjuvants
It should be noted that adjuvants are considered to be components of vaccines. Thus, each new adjuvanted vaccine
is considered a new entity that will require appropriate physicochemical characterisation and non- clinical and
clinical evaluation. It is the specific antigen-adjuvant formulation (as a whole) that is tested in non-clinical and
clinical trials and receives MA or licensure based on demonstration of safety and efficacy.
There is substantial diversity among vaccine adjuvants, antigens and the diseases they are designed to prevent.
Therefore, the supportive information needed for adjuvant-related changes will depend on product-specific
features, the clinical indications, and the impact of the change. The recommendations in the WHO Guidelines on
the non-clinical evaluation of vaccine adjuvants and adjuvanted vaccines [12] should be followed.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    18
8.2.
Annual Viral Strain Changes for Influenza Vaccines
To ensure that influenza vaccines are effective against circulating influenza virus strains, the WHO reviews global
epidemiological data twice annually and if necessary, recommends new vaccine strain(s) in accordance with the
available evidence for the northern and southern hemispheres [13, 14]. The WHO and NRAs usually recommend
the use of certain virus strains based on the antigenic characteristics of the influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) and
neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins. Influenza vaccine viruses usually are derived from isolates obtained from
laboratories in the WHO influenza network.
For seasonal influenza vaccines, annual changes in the vaccine strain composition are considered Type II
amendments because of the extensive experience with such changes and to maximise flexibility and brevity of the
review process as needed. HCRs of approved seasonal vaccines are expected to submit a Type II amendment to
support annual changes in the influenza strain composition.
To allow for timely distribution of vaccines, SAHPRA will review the amendment in a speedy process. The supportive
quality information generally consists of information on the source of the viruses, passage history until
establishment of working seeds, and results of quality release tests performed on working virus seeds (including
identity confirmation). In addition, updated product Labelling information items (Professional Information and
inner and outer labels with relevant strain composition and formulation year) should also be provided.
Changes to manufacturing processes, posology, and product labelling information of influenza vaccines that are
not related to the annual update should follow the normal categorisation as described in Appendices 2 to 4 and
should not be included in the strain change amendments to avoid delays in the approval process. Due to the time
constraints related to the seasonality of influenza vaccines, changes that are not related to vaccine strain
composition should be timed such that approval would allow manufacture of vaccines made with the change to be
distributed prior to the start of the influenza season.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    19
8.2.1
Introduction
There are several influenza vaccines registered and marketed in South Africa. Each year, the manufacturer changes
the viral strain composition to conform to those deemed most likely to cause outbreaks during the next influenza
season [May to October] in the southern hemisphere.
The WHO, via the International Influenza Centres assisted by National Laboratories, studies the isolates, incidence
andvirulenceofinfluenzaviralstrainaroundtheworldandgeneratesstrainrecommendations, prior to the influenza
season for each hemisphere. The WHO recommendations are intended for worldwide use and therefore need to
be adapted to the epidemiological situation of each country.
The influenza vaccine manufacturers obtain viral strains that conform to the characteristics of the strains
recommended by the WHO and develop manufacturing processes to incorporate these into their respective
products. These formulations are then submitted for approval from the regulatory authority toamendtheformula,
the manufacturing processes (where applicable), the Professional Information (PI) and the Patient Information
Leaflet (PIL).
This guideline outlines the process to be followed when submitting an annual viral strain change to ensure
standardised and adequate evaluation for quality, safety and therapeutic efficacy, and to expedite the approval
process.
Thisprocess issolelyfor routineannualvaccineviralstrainchanges andanyrelatedsafetyinformationto be included
in the PI and the PIL. No other amendments may be included in the process.
8.2.2
Time for submission
The application must be submitted to SAHPRA as soon as the required information is available. Submission of the
application by February of the year of the intended Influenza season will allow for a comprehensive and diligent
review.
The intention is to have routine annual vaccine strain changes approved by the end of February of the year of the
relevant influenza season. Late or incomplete submissions will lead to delays in the review and approval process.
8.2.3 Information and documentation required
The application to change viral strain involves changes to the Registration Certificate and therefore the relevant
amendment fee should be paid, and proof of such payment be included in the submission.
The following information and the relevant documents must be included:
1)
WHO recommended strain list for the relevant hemisphere.
2)
Manufacturer’s choice of strains for inclusion.
3)
Details of manufacturing procedure (declaration if unchanged).
4)
The source, history and master/working seed characterisation of each strain included.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page    20
5)
Egg/cell culture: Safety specifications and tests (Declaration if unchanged).
6)
Final product release specifications and results. This must include Endotoxin release limit.
7)
Retrospective data about the “efficacy or performance” of influenza vaccines (preceding year / season).
8)
Stability data (accelerated or from the most recent, or most similar batch of approved vaccine).
9)
Copy of the approved Professional Information
10)
Copy of the proposed Professional Information indicating: The year/season for which the vaccine will be 
used.
8.3
Bridging Studies
Clinical and non-clinical bridging studies are trials in which a parameter of interest (e.g., manufacturing process,
formulation, dosing schedule) is directly compared with a changed version of that parameter with respect to the
effect of the change on the product’s clinical performance. If the physicochemical properties, biological activity,
purity, level of impurities and contaminants of the pre-amendment and post-amendment product are comparable,
the safety and efficacy of the biological medicine can be inferred. However, non- clinical and/or clinical bridging
studies may be required when analytical data alone are insufficient to establish comparability. Comparison of
therapeutic or immune responses and safety outcomes [e.g., rates of common adverse events (AEs) and serious
AEs (SAEs)] are often the primary objectives. If the immune response and safety profiles are similar, then efficacy
and safety of the changed medicine can be inferred.
In some cases, safety and efficacy data comparing the medicine before the change to the medicine produced with
the change (bridging studies), may be required. The following are examples of manufacturing changes that may
require non-clinical and/or clinical bridging studies:
•
Use of a new or re-derived virus seed or bacterial cell bank or host cell line (i.e. re-derived master cell 
bank).
•
New agents used for inactivation or purification of the active ingredient with major impact on the 
quality of the active ingredient.
•
New dosage form.
•
New formulation (e.g., amount and composition of ingredients, adjuvants, or preservatives, amount of 
reactogenic residual components from the manufacturing process).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  21
8.4
Approach for the submission of the applications for COVID-19 strains update
8.4.1.
COVID-19 vaccine strain updates for Registered vaccines may be submitted as Type II amendments.
8.4.2
Regulatory data requirements for approved vaccines to support a strain change variation are as 
follows: 
a.
The updated vaccine should closely match circulating SARS-CoV-2 strains in South Africa and should be
monovalent. 
b.
Clinical trial data with the speciﬁc adapted vaccine would not be required prior to approval of the
recommended updated composition, provided predictable clinical reactogenicity and immunogenicity with
different compositions have been previously demonstrated (use of prior knowledge on a specific vaccine). 
c.
Immune responses in animals or humans with the approved antigen composition to indicate levels of cross-
reactivity against emerging variants of concern. 
d.
Clinical trial data on one or two strain changes would be adequate to demonstrate predictability of
performance of the specific product technology, provided no major changes to the manufacturing process or
vaccine construct are introduced. 
e.
Characterisation and validation of any updates to the manufacturing process, including the introduction of
additional/alternative types of technology, to be provided as part of the CMC/quality package. 
f.
The use of prior knowledge on a specific product is acceptable for the approval of strain changes for currently
authorised or approved COVID-19 vaccines. Spike antigen change procedures should take into consideration
all available information and data from studies, and at the present time can be based on quality and non-
clinical data. 
g. Post-registration commitments may need to be agreed, e.g., to gather data on vaccine effectiveness against
severe outcomes as well as symptomatic disease. Immunogenicity data from clinical trials are to be considered
to support future antigen change decisions.
9. REFERENCES
1.
Guidelines for national authorities on quality assurance for biological products. Annex 2, in: 
WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization. Forty-second report. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 1992 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 822).
2.
Regulation of vaccines: building on existing medicines regulatory authorities. Annex 2, in: 
WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization, Forty-fifth report. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1995 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 858).
3.
WHO NRA assessment tools/ indicators. Geneva, World Health Organization
4.
Guidelines on nonclinical evaluation of vaccines. Annex 1, in: WHO Expert Committee on 
Biological Standardization. Fifty-fourth report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005 
(WHO Technical Report Series, No. 927).
5.
Guidelines on clinical evaluation of vaccines: regulatory expectations. Annex 1, in: WHO 
Expert Committee on Biological Standardization. Fifty-second report. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2004 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 924).
6.
Guidelines on stability evaluation of vaccines. Annex 3 in: WHO Expert Committee on
Biological Standardization. Fifty-seventh report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011
(WHO Technical Report Series, No. 962).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  22
7.
Handbook: good laboratory practice (GLP). Quality principles for regulated non-clinical 
research and development, 2nd edition. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009.
8.
Guidelines for good clinical practice (GCP) for trials on pharmaceutical products. Annex 3 in: 
The use of essential drugs. Sixth report of the WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 1995 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 850).
9.
Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: main principles. Annex 4, in: 
WHO Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty- seventh 
report. Geneva, World Health Organization 2003 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 908).
10. Good manufacturing practices for biological products. Annex 1, in: WHO Expert Committee 
on Biological Standardization. Forty-second report. Geneva, World Health Organization 1992
(WHO Technical Report Series, No. 822).
11. Guidelines for independent lot release of vaccines by regulatory authorities. WHO Expert
Committee on Biological Standardization. Sixty-first report. Geneva, World Health
Organization (inpress).
12. Guidelines on the nonclinical evaluation of vaccine adjuvants and adjuvanted vaccines. WHO 
Expert Committee on Biological Standardization. Sixty-fourth report. Geneva, World Health 
Organization (this document is to be submitted to the ECBS in 2013).
13. Recommendations for the production and control of influenza vaccine (inactivated). WHO 
Expert Committee on Biological Standardization. Fifty-fourth report. Geneva, World Health 
Organization 2005 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 927).
14. Influenza strain selection procedures
15. WHO guidelines on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies in relation to biological and 
pharmaceutical products (document WHO/BCT/QSD/03.01). Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2003.
16. Guidelines on the quality, safety and efficacy of biotherapeutic protein products prepared by
recombinant DNA technology. In: WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization: 
sixty-fourth report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014: Annex 4 (WHO Technical 
Report Series, No 987
17. WHO Guidelines on procedure and data requirements for changes to approved biotherapeutic products, 
proposed guidelines WHO/BS/2017.2311)
18. WHO Guideline for procedures and data requirements for changes to approved 
vaccine (TRS 993 Annex-4 2015)
19. Guidelines on evaluation of similar biotherapeutic products (SBPs). In: WHO Expert 
Committee on Biological Standardization: sixtieth report. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013: Annex 2 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 977
20. Guidelines on evaluation of monoclonal antibodies as similar biotherapeutic products (SBPs). In: 
WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization: Sixty-seventh report. Geneva: World  Health 
Organization; 2017: Annex 2 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 1004.
21. Health Canada Guidelines
22. EMA guidelines
23. United States Food and Drug Administration regulations and guidance. 21 Code of 
Federal Regulations, Parts: 601.12 Changes to an approved application; 610.9 Equivalent 
methods and processes. FDA Guidance for Industry: Changes to an Approved Application: 
Biological Products (July, 1997).
24. Pharmaceutical and Analytical CTD/ guideline, 2.25 PA CTD Aug 14 v6
25. Amendments guideline, 2.08 Amendments Jul12 v6
26. Biosimilar Medicines: Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements Guideline, 2.30 
Biosimilars Aug14 V3
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  23
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  24
10. APPENDIX 1: REPORTING CATEGORIES
It is recommended that NRAs establish review timelines to allow HCRs to plan the implementation of changes. The
review times are established based on the capabilities of the NRAs, the impact of the change, and the amount of
required supportive data. Therefore, the review time frames for major changes will be longer than for moderate
changes. The suggested review timelines are shown in Table 1 below. The review time would start when the
applicationhas beenacceptedforreviewandfound to be complete and end at the time when the initial assessment
is shared with the HCR either in approval or as a request for supplementary documentation. In the case of the
latter, the shorter timelines may apply for the secondary assessment following reception of HCR answers. In case
of need of minor clarifications, SAHPRA may communicate with the HCR during the initial assessment period
without stopping the clock to be able to finalise the assessment within the proposed timeline.
Table 1. Reporting categories for Amendments and suggested review timelines
QUALITY
Amendment type
Procedure
Suggested review timelines
Type II
Prior Approval Amendment
≤ 120 working days
Type IB
Implementable
after
60
working days
60 working days
Type IA
Require notification to 
SAHPRA a
Asperarticle8ofEUvariationregulation (30-
day review time from date of notification)
Type IAIN
Immediate notification
Asperarticle8ofEUvariationregulation (30-
day review time from date of notification)
a Type IA amendments that are related to Type IB or Type II amendments should be included in the Prior Approval
Amendment application (e.g., a minor change, such as the narrowing of a specification, shouldbeincludedintheapplication
for Type IB or Type II amendments  which includes updated quality control release information).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  25
11. APPENDIX 2: POST-APPROVAL CHANGES TO THE ACTIVE BIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE
The examples presented in this appendix are intended to assist with the classification of changes made to the
quality information for an active biological substance. The information summarised in the table provides
recommendations for:
(a)
the conditions to be fulfilled for a given change to be classified as either a Type II, Type IB or Type IA
amendment If any of the conditions outlined for a given change are not fulfilled, the change is automatically
considered the next higher level of change. For example, if any of the conditions recommended for a Type
IB Change are not fulfilled, the change is considered a Type II  change.
(b)
the supporting data for a given change, either to be submitted to SAHPRA and/or maintained by the HCR.
If any of the supporting data outlined for a given change is not provided, is different or is not considered
applicable, adequate scientific justification should be provided; and (c) the Amendment Type (e.g. Type II,
Type IB, or Type IA amendment).
It is important to note that SAHPRA reserves the right to request additional information or material as it
deems appropriate, or to define conditions not specifically described in this document in order to allow
SAHPRA to adequately assess the quality, safety and therapeutic efficacy of a vaccine. HCRs should contact
SAHPRA if a change is not included in the table and if it may have the potential to impact on product quality.
Supporting data should be provided according to the submission format accepted by SAHPRA. This is ZACTD
and/or ZA eCTD formatted submissions, the supporting data should be provided in the appropriate sections
of the CTD Modules (not as separate documents).
Quality Changes to Comply with Updated Compendia and/or Pharmacopeia
SAHPRA recognises certain compendia and/or pharmacopeia (i.e British Pharmacopoeia, European
Pharmacopoeia and United States Pharmacopoeia).
Quality changes to approved compendial/pharmacopoeial materials (e.g. raw materials, reagents, etc.),
analytical procedures or assays solely to comply with updated compendial/pharmacopoeial requirements
are considered a minor change as long as the change is made within six (6) months of the implementation
of the updated compendial/pharmacopoeial requirements. Otherwise, the HCR is required to file a
moderate change for approval by SAHPRA.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Biological Medicines Amendment guideline
May 2025
Page  26
B. QUALITY CHANGES (Q) B.I ACTIVE BIOLOGICAL INGREDIENT
[In this guideline, this section/code is expanded to also cover changes to raw materials/reagents of biological origin 
and reference standards/materials]
(Q) B.I.a Manufacture
Description of Change:
(Q) B.1.a.1 Change in the manufacturer of a starting
material/ reagent/intermediate used in the 
manufacturing process of the active substance or 
change in the manufacturer (including where 
relevant quality control testing sites) of the active 
substance, where no Ph. Eur. Certificate of 
Suitability is part of the approved dossier
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.a.1.e. Change to an active biological
ingredient manufacturing facility or change in
the
manufacturing
facility
of
starting
materials/active
bulk/reagents/any
intermediates of the active biological ingredient
used in the manufacturing process of active
biological ingredient
None
1-4,6-8
II
1-4
2, 4-8
II
(Q) B.I.a.1.j Changes to quality control testing
arrangement
for
a
biological
active
ingredient:replacementoradditionof site
a
site
where
batch
control/testing
including a
biological/immunological/immune 
chemical method takes place
1 & 11
II
(Q) B.I.a.1.k. New storage site of master cell 
bank and/or working cell bank
9, 10
IB
Conditions
1.
This is an addition of a manufacturing facility/suite to an approved active manufacturing site.
2.
Any changes to the manufacturing process and/or controls are considered either moderate or minor.
3.
The new facility/suite is under the same QA/QC oversight.
4.
The proposed change does not involve additional containment requirements.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  27
Supporting documents
1.
Evidence of facility GMP compliance.
2.
Name, address, and responsibility of the proposed facility.
3.
Summary of the process validation and/or evaluation studies. The complete report with all raw data could
be requested during review.
4.
Comparability of the pre- and post-change active biological ingredient with respect to physico- chemical
characterisation, biological activity, and impurity profile. Occasionally, bridging non- clinical and/or clinical
studies may be required when quality data are insufficient to establish comparability. The extent and
nature of non-clinical and/or clinical studies should be determined on a case-by-case basis taking into
consideration the quality comparability findings, the nature and level of the knowledge of the medicine,
existing relevant non- clinical and clinical data, and aspects of medicine use.
5.
Justification for the classification of any manufacturing process and/or control changes as moderate.
6.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data, in a
comparativetabularformat,foratleastthree(3)consecutivecommercialscalebatchesofthepre- and post-
change active biological ingredient. Comparative pre-change test results do not need to be generated
concurrently; relevant historical testing results are acceptable. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller
scale batches, and/or the use of less than three (3) batches and/or leveraging data from scientifically
justified representative batches or batches not necessarily manufactured consecutively may be acceptable
where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
7.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale batches of active biological ingredient produced with
the proposed changes under real time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test
results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability
programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testingunlessotherwise
justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real time stability studies to support
the full shelf life /hold-time of the active biological ingredient under its normal storage conditions and to
report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use
of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three (3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions
for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
8.
Updated post-approval stability protocol.
9.
Amendment to the relevant section of the dossier.
10. The amendment schedule should clearly outline the “present” and “proposed” storage site.
11. Information demonstrating technology transfer qualification.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  28
Q)
B.I.a.1N
Change
in
supplier
of
raw
materials/reagents of biological origin (e.g.,
production eggs, foetal calf serum, human
serum albumin)
None
1, 2, 3
IB
1
1, 2
IA
Condition:
1. The change is for compendial raw materials/reagents of biological origin (excluding human plasma- 
derived materials).
Supporting Data
1.
For active biological ingredients obtained from, or manufactured with reagents obtained from sources that
are at risk of transmitting BSE/TSE agents (e.g., ruminant origin), information and evidence that the
material does not pose a potential BSE/TSE risk (e.g., name of manufacturer, species and tissues from
which the material is a derivative, country of origin of the source animals, its use and previousacceptance).
2.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data, in
a comparative tabular format, for one (1) commercial scale batch of the pre- and post- change active
biological ingredient. Batch data on the next two full production batches should be made available upon
request and reported by the HCR if outside specification (with proposed action). The use of a smaller scale
batch may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
3.
Information assessing the risk with respect to potential contamination with adventitious agents (e.g.,
impact on the viral clearance studies, BSE/TSE risk).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  29
Description of Change
(Q ( B.I.a.2 Changes in the 
manufacturing process of the 
active biological Ingredient.
Conditions 
to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.a.2.i Change to the active biological ingredient fermentation, viral propagation or cellular propagation 
process (upstream manufacturing process)
a.    a critical change (e.g.,
incorporation of disposable 
bioreactor technology)
None
1-7, 9, 11
II
b. a change with moderate potential
to adversely Impact quality of the
active biological ingredient or
final product (e.g., extension of
the in vitro cell age beyond
validated parameters)
2,4
1-6, 8, 10
IB
c.     a non-critical change, such as: 
change in harvesting and/or 
pooling procedures which 
does not affect the method of 
manufacture, recovery, 
intermediate storage 
conditions, sensitivity of 
detection of adventitious 
agents, or production scale; or
duplication of a fermentation
train;
or
addition
of
similar/comparable 
bioreactors
1-6, 9-11
1-4
IB
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  30
(Q) B.I.a.2.ii Change to the active biological ingredient purification process involving 
(downstream manufacturing process)
a. a critical change (e.g., change that could
potentially
impact
negatively
the
viral
clearance capacity of the process or the
impurity profile of the active)
None
  1-2, 5-
7,9,11,12
II
b. a change with moderate potential to impact
quality of the active or final product (e.g.
change in the chemical separation method,
for example ion- exchange HPLC to reverse
phase HPLC)
2,4
1-2,5-7,10-
11
IB
c. a non-critical change with minimal potential to
impact the quality of the active biological
ingredient or final product (e.g. addition of an
in-line filtration step equivalent to the
approved filtration step)
1-5
1-2
IA
(Q)
B.I.a.2.iii
Change
in
source
of
raw
materials/reagents of biological origin
None
4, 7, 12-
13
IB
8
4, 7
IA
(Q) B.I.a.2.iv Introduction of reprocessing steps
14
8,
10-11,
14
IB
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  30
Conditions
1.
No change in the principle of the sterilisation procedures of the active biological ingredient.
2.
The change does not impact the viral clearance data or the chemical nature of an inactivating agent.
3.
No change in the active biological ingredient specifications outside of the approved ranges.
4.
No change in the impurity profile of the active biological ingredient outside of the approved limits.
5.
The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
6.
The change does not affect the purification process.
7.
The change in scale is linear.
8.
The change is for compendial raw materials/reagents of biological origin (excluding human plasma-
derived materials).
9.
The new fermentation train is identical to the approved fermentation train(s), if applicable.
10. No change in the approved in vitro cell age.
11. The change is not expected to have an impact on the quality, safety or efficacy of final product.
12. The need for reprocessing is not due to recurrent deviations from the validated process and the root 
cause triggering reprocessing is identified.
13. The change in scale involves the use of the same bioreactor (i.e. does not involve the use of a larger 
bioreactor).
14. The need for reprocessing is not due to recurrent deviations from the validated process and the root 
cause triggering reprocessing is identified.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  31
Supporting documents
1.
Justification for the classification of the change(s) as critical, moderate or non-critical as it relates to
the impact on the quality of the active biological ingredient.
2.
Flow diagram (including process and in-process controls) of the proposed manufacturing process(es)
and a brief narrative description of the proposed manufacturing process(es).
3.
If the change results in an increase in the number of population doublings or sub cultivations,
information on the characterisation and testing of the post-production cell bank for recombinant
product/s, or of the active biological ingredient for non-recombinant product/s.
4.
For active biological ingredients obtained from, or manufactured with reagents obtained from
sources that are at risk of transmitting BSE/TSE agents (e.g., ruminant origin), information and
evidence that the material does not pose a potential BSE/TSE risk (e.g. name of manufacturer, species
and tissues from which the material is a derivative, country of origin of the source animals, its use and
previous acceptance).
5.
Process validation and/or evaluation studies.
6.
Comparability of the pre- and post-change active biological ingredient with respect to physico-
chemical characterisation, biological activity, and impurity profile. Occasionally, bridging non-clinical
and/or clinical studies may be required when quality data are insufficient to establish comparability.
The extent and nature of nonclinical and/or clinical studies should be determined on a case-by-case
basis taking into consideration the quality comparability findings, the nature and level of knowledge
of the medicine, existing relevant nonclinical and clinical data, and aspects of medicine use.
7.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data,
in a comparative tabular format, for at least three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches of the
pre- and post- change active biological ingredient. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale
batches, and/or the use of less than three (3) batches may be acceptable where justified and agreed
upon by SAHPRA.
8.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitativedata,
in a comparative tabular format, for one (1) commercialscale batch of the pre-andpost-changeactive
biological ingredient. Batch data on the next two full production batches should be made available
upon request and reported by the HCR if outside specification (with proposed action). The use of a
smaller scale batch may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  32
9.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale active biological ingredient batches
produced with the proposed changes under real time/real temperature testing conditions.
Comparative pre- change test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical
results for lots on stability programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3)
months testing unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake
real time stability studies to support the full shelf life/hold-time of the active biological ingredient
under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long-
term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than
three (3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable
where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
10. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least one commercial scale active biological ingredient batch produced
with the proposed changes under real time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-
change test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on
stability programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing
unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real time
stability studies to support the full shelf life/hold-time of the active biological ingredient under its
normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long-term
stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches and/or use of forced
degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by
SAHPRA.
11. Updated post-approval stability protocol and stability commitment to place the first commercial
scale batch of the final product manufactured using the post-change active biological ingredient into
the stability program.
12. Information assessing the risk with respect to potential contamination with adventitious agents (e.g.,
impact on the viral clearance studies, BSE/TSE risk).
13. Information demonstrating comparability of the auxiliary materials/reagents of both sources.
14. Data describing the root cause triggering the reprocessing as well as validation data (e.g., extended
hold times, resistance to additional mechanical stress) to support that the reprocessing does not have
an impact on the active biological ingredient.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  33
Description of Change
Conditions to
be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.a.2.v. Changes to the cell banks
a. generation of a new Master Cell Bank (MCB)
1
1-2,5,7-9
IB
b. generation of a new Working Cell Bank (WCB)
None
1-2
IB
2-4
1-2
IAIN
c. extension of shelf life of the MCB or WCB
5
1-2
IB
(Q) B.I.a.2.vi Changes to the seed lots
a. a new Master Seed Lot (MSL); or a Working
Seed Lot (WSL) extended beyond an approved
passage level
None
5-9, 11
II
b. generation of a new WSL
2-3
5-9, 11
IB
2-4
5-6, 11
IAIN
(Q) B.I.a.2.vii Change in cell bank/seed lot testing 
site
6
10
IA
(Q) B.I.a.2.viii Change in cell bank/seed lot 
qualification protocol
None
3-4
IB
7
4
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  34
Conditions
1.
The new MCB is generated from a pre-approved MCB or WCB.
2.
The new cell bank/seed lot is generated from a pre-approved MCB/MSL.
3.
The new cell bank/seed lot is at the pre-approved passage level.
4.
The new cell bank/seed lot is released according to a pre-approved protocol/process or as 
described in the original license.
5.
The testing to support the extension of shelf life is performed according to the pre- approved 
protocol or as described in the original license.
6.
No changes have been made to the tests/acceptance criteria used for the release of the cell 
bank/seed lot.
7.
The protocol is considered more stringent (i.e. the addition of new tests or tightening of 
acceptance criteria).
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  35
Supporting Data
1.
Qualification of the cell bank according to guidelines considered acceptable by SAHPRA.
2.
Information on the characterisation and testing of the MCB/WCB, and cells from the end-of- production
(EPC) passage or post-production passage.
3.
Justification of the change to cell bank/seed lot qualification protocol.
4.
Updated cell bank/seed lot qualification protocol
5.
Comparability of the pre- and post-change active biological ingredient with respect to physico- chemical
characterisation, biological activity, and impurity profile. Occasionally, bridging non-clinical and/or clinical
studies may be required when quality data are insufficient to establish comparability. The extent and nature
of non-clinical and/or clinical studies should be determined on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration
the quality comparability findings, the nature and level of the knowledge of the medicine, existing relevant
non-clinical and clinical data, and aspects of medicine use.
6.
Description of the batches and summary of results as quantitative data in tabular format for the new seed
lot.
7.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data, in a
comparative tabular format, for at least three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches of the active
biological ingredient derived from the new cell bank/seed lot. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale
batches, and/or the use of less than three (3) batches may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon
by the SAHPRA.
8.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale active biological ingredient batches produced with the
proposed changes under real time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre- change test results
do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme are
acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless otherwise justified.
Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability studies to support the full shelf
life/hold-timeoftheactivebiologicalingredientunder its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA
of any failures in these ongoing long term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale
batches, the useof less than three(3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing
may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by the SAHPRA.
9.
Updated post-approval stability protocol.
10. Evidence that the new company/facility is GMP compliant.
11. Revised information on the quality and controls of critical starting materials (e.g., SPF eggs, SPF
chickens/hens) used in the generation of the new working seed lot, where applicable.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  36
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.a.2.ix Change in product-contact equipment/material used in the active biological ingredient 
manufacturing process, such as:
a. introduction of new equipment having different
operating principles and different product material
None
1-5
IB
3-4
125
IA
b. introduction of new equipment with the same
operating principles but different product
contact material used in a critical step new
product-contact equipment to be used during
viral inactivation)
None
1, 3- 5
IB
3-4
1,4,5
IA
c. introduction of new equipment with different
operating principles but the same product
contact material
None
1-3, 5
IB
4
1,2,5
IA
d. replacement of product-contact equipment with 
equivalent equipment
none
3
IA
e. change of product-contact  equipment  from 
dedicated to shared
1,2
1, 6
IA
f. relocation of equipment to another room in the 
same facility/suite/premises
2,4,5
None
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  37
Conditions
1. The site is approved as a multi-product facility.
2. The change has no impact on the risk of cross-contamination and is supported by validated cleaning 
procedures.
3. The manufacturing process is not impacted by the change in product-contact equipment.
4. The change has no impact on product quality.
5. Re-qualification of the equipment follows the original qualification protocol, if applicable.
Supporting Data
1.
Information on the in-process control testing.
2.
Process validation and/or evaluation studies.
3.
Description of the batches and summary of results as quantitative data, in a comparative tabular format,
for one (1) commercial scale batches of the active biological ingredient produced with the approved and
proposed product contact equipment/material). Batch data on the next two (2) full production batches
should be made available upon request and reported by the MAH if outside specification (with the
proposed action).
4.
Information on leachables and extractables.
5.
Information on the new equipment and comparison of similarities and differences regarding operating 
principles and specifications between the new and the replaced equipment.
6.
Information describing the change-over procedures for the shared product-contact equipment.
(Q) B.I.a.3 Change in batch size (including batch
size
ranges)
of
active
substance
or
intermediate
used
in
the
manufacturing
process of the active biological substance
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
Documents
Amendment Type
c) the change requires assessment of the
comparability
of
a
biological/immunological
active substance
None
1, 2, 5, 6, 7,8
II
e) the scale for a biological/immunological active
substance is increased/decreased without process
change (e.g., duplication of line)
None
1,2,3,4
IB
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  38
Supporting Data
1.
Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossier (presented in the CTD format).
2.
The batch numbers of the tested batches having the proposed batch size.
3.
Batch analysis data (in a comparative tabulated format) on a minimum of one production batch of the
active substance or intermediate as appropriate, manufactured to both the currently approved and the
proposed sizes. Batch data on the next two full production batches should be made available upon
request and reported by the marketing authorisation holder if outside specification (with the proposed
action).
4.
Copy of approved specifications of the active substance (and of the intermediate, if applicable).
5.
A declaration from the marketing authorisation holder or the ASMF holder as appropriate that the
changes to the manufacturing methods are only those necessitated by scale-up or downscaling, e.g.,
use of different-sized equipment, that the change does not adversely affect the reproducibility of the
process, that it is not the result of unexpected events arising during manufacture orbecauseofstability
concerns and that the specifications of the active substance.
6.
Comparability of the pre- and post-change active biological ingredient with respect to physico- chemical
characterisation, biological activity, and impurity profile. Occasionally, bridging nonclinical and/or
clinical studies may be required when quality data are insufficient to establish comparability. The extent
and nature of nonclinical and/or clinical studies should be determined on a case-by-case basis taking
into consideration the quality comparability findings, the nature and level of knowledge of the medicine,
existing relevant nonclinical and clinical data, and aspects of medicine use.
7.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data,
in a comparative tabular format, for at least three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches of the pre-
and post-change active biological ingredient. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches,
and/or the use of less than three (3) batches may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by
SAHPRA.
8.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale active biological ingredient batches
produced with the proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions.
Comparative pre-change test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical
results for lots on stability programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3)
months testing unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake
real-time stability studies to support the full shelf life/hold-time of the activebiologicalingredientunder
itsnormalstorageconditionsandtoreporttoSAHPRAofany failures in these ongoing long-term stability
studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three (3) batches
and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and
agreed upon by SAHPRA.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  39
(Q) B.I.a.4 Change to in-process tests or limits applied during manufacture of the active biological ingredient, 
involving:
a. tightening of in-process limits
5, 9
2, 3, 7
IA
b. addition of new in-process test and limits
4, 5, 10, 11
2, 4, 5, 7,8,
10
IA
c. deletion of a non-significant in-process test
4, 5, 6
2, 7, 9
IAIN
d. widening of the approved in-process limits, which
may have a significant effect on the overall
quality of the active biological ingredient
None
2, 4, 5, 7, 8,
10
II
e. deletion of an in-process test which may have a
significant effect on the overall quality of the
active biological ingredient
None
2, 4, 5, 7, 8,
II
f. addition or replacement of an in-process test as a 
result of a safety or quality issue
None
2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
10
IB
g. change in in-process controls testing facility
3-5, 7, 8
11
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  40
Conditions
1.
The change in specifications for the materials is within the approved ranges.
2.
The grade of the materials is the same or is of higher quality.
3.
No change in active biological ingredient specifications outside of the approved ranges.
4.
No change in the impurity profile of the active biological ingredient outside of the approved limits.
5.
The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
6.
The test does not concern a critical parameter, e.g., content, impurity, any critical physical characteristics or 
microbial purity.
7.
The replaced analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity, if 
applicable.
8.
No change in the in-process control limits outside of the approved ranges.
9.
The test procedure remains the same, or changes in the test procedure are minor.
10. Any new test method does not concern a novel non-standard technique, or a standard technique used in a 
novel way.
11. The new test method is not a biological/immunological/immunochemical or physicochemical method or a
method using a biological reagent (does not include standard pharmacopoeial microbiological methods).
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  41
Supporting Data
1.
Revised information on the quality and controls of the materials (e.g., raw materials, starting materials,
solvents, reagents, catalysts) used in the manufacture of the post-change active biological substance.
2.
Revised information on the controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process and on
intermediates of the proposed active biological substance
3.
Updated active biological substance specifications if changed.
4.
Copies or summaries of analytical procedures, if new analytical procedures are used.
5.
Copies or summaries of validation reports, if new analytical procedures are used.
6.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data, in a
comparative tabular format, for one (1) commercial scale batch of the approved and proposed active
biological substance. Batch data on the next two (2) full production batches should be made available upon
request and reported by the HCR if outside specification (with proposed action). The use of a smaller scale
batch may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
7.
Comparative table or description where applicable of pre- and post-change in-process tests/limits.
8.
Description of the batches and summary of in-process and release testing results as quantitative data, in a
comparative tabular format, for three (3) commercial scale batches of the pre- and post- change active
biological substance. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, and/or the use of lessthanthree
(3) batches may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA. Comparative pre- change test
results need not be generated concurrently; relevant historical testing results are acceptable.
9.
Justification/risk assessment showing that the parameter is non-significant.
10. Justification for the new in-process test and limits.
11. Evidence that the new company/facility is GMP compliant.
(Q) B.I.a.5 Changes to the active substance of a
seasonal, pre-pandemic or pandemic vaccine against
human influenza
Conditions to be
fulfilled
Supporting 
data
Amendment Type
a) replacement of the strain(s) in a seasonal, pre-
pandemic or a pandemic vaccine against human
influenza
See section
8.2
of 
the 
guideline  
above
See section
8.2 of the
guideline
above
 II
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  42
(Q) B.I.a.6 Covid-19 vaccines strains update: Changes
to the Covid-19 vaccines strains
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting
data
Amendment Type
a) replacement or changes to the COVID-19 vaccines
strain(s) in a seasonal, pre- pandemic or a pandemic
situations
See section
8.4 of this 
guideline above
See section
8.4
of
this
guideline above
 II
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  43
(Q) B.I.b Control of the Active biological substance
Description of Change
Conditions to
be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.b.1 Change in the specification parameters and/or limits of an active biological substance, starting
material/intermediate/reagent used in the manufacturing process of the active biological substance, involving:
a. tightening of an acceptance criterion for medicinal
products subject to official control authority batch
release
1, 8, 9
1
IAIN
b. tightening of specification limits
1,8,9
1
IA
c. addition of new specification parameters to the 
specification with its corresponding test method
1-3
1-3,9
IA
d. deletion of non-significant specification parameter
None
1,9
IAIN
e. deletion of a specification parameter which may have
a significant effect on the overall quality of the active
biological ingredient and/or finished
II
f. widening of an acceptance criterion or change
outside the approved specification limits range for
the active biological substance
None
1,5, 8
II
g. widening of the approved specifications limits for
starting materials/intermediates, which may have a
significant effect on the overall quality of the active
biological ingredient and/or final product
None
1,5,8
II
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  44
(Q) B.I.b.1.ii change in animal species/strains for a test
(e.g. new species/strains, animals of different age, new
supplier where genotype of the animal cannot be
confirmed)
None
6-7
IB
(Q) B.I.b.2 Change in test procedure for active substance or starting material/reagent/intermediate used in 
the manufacturing process of the active substance
a. minor changes to an approved analytical procedure
4-7
1,4-5
IA
b. deletion of an analytical procedure for the active
biological
ingredient
or
starting
material/reagent/intermediate,
if
an
alternative
test
procedure is already authorised
10
9
IB
c.
other
changes
to
a
test
procedure
including
replacement or deletion of analytical procedure for a
reagent, which does not have a significant effect on
the overall quality of the active biological substance
None
1-3,4-5
IA
d.
substantial
change
to
or
replacement
of
a
biological/immunological/immunochemical
test
method or a method using a biological reagent for a
biological active substance
None
1-5
II
e. other changes to a test procedure (including
replacement or addition) for the active biological
ingredient or a starting material/intermediate
None
1-5
IB
g. a change from an in-house analytical procedure to a
recognized
compendial/pharmacopeial
analytical
procedure
4,7
1-3
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  45
Conditions
1.
The change does not result from unexpected events arising during manufacture (e.g., new unqualified 
impurity, change in total impurity limits.
2.
No change in the limits/acceptance criteria outside of the approved ranges for the approved assays.
3.
The addition of test is not to monitor new impurity species.
4.
No change in the acceptance criteria outside of the approved ranges.
5.
The method of analysis is the same and is based on the same analytical technique or principle (e.g., a change
in column length or temperature, but not a different type of column or method) and no new impurities are
detected.
6.
The modified analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity.
7.
The change does not concern potency testing.
8.
Acceptance criterion for residuals is within recognised or approved acceptance limits, e.g., within ICH Limits
for a Class 3 residual solvent or pharmacopoeial requirements.
9.
The analytical procedure remains the same, or changes to the analytical procedure are minor.
10. An alternative test procedure is already authorised for the specification parameter and this procedure has
not been added through IA/IAIN notification.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  46
Supporting Data
1.
Updated active biological ingredient specifications.
2.
Copies or summaries of analytical procedures, if new analytical procedures are used.
3.
Copies or summaries of validation reports, if new analytical procedures are used.
4.
Comparative results demonstrate that the approved and proposed analytical procedures are equivalent.
5.
Justification of the proposed active biological ingredient specifications (e.g., tests, acceptance criteria, or 
analytical procedures).
6.
Data demonstrating that the change in animals/strains gives comparable results with those obtained 
using the approved animals/strains.
7.
Copies of relevant certificate of fitness for use (e.g., veterinary certificate)
8.
Declaration/evidence that consistency of quality and of the production process is  maintained.
9.
Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossier (e.g., description of the analytical methodology, a 
summary of validation data.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  47
(Q) B.I.b.N.1. Reference Standards or Materials
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment 
Type
a. qualification of a new reference standard against a 
new primary international standard
None
1-2
IB
b. change in the reference standard from in-house (no
relationship
with
international
standard)
to
pharmacopoeial or international standard
None
1-2
IB
c. qualification of a new lot of reference standard
against
the
approved
reference
standard
(including qualification of a new lot of a secondary
reference standard against the approved primary
standard)
1
1-2
IA
d. change to reference standard qualification protocol
None
3-4
IB
e. extension of reference standard shelf life
2
5
IB
Conditions
1.
Qualification of the new reference standard is according to an approved protocol.
2.
The extension of the shelf life is according to an approved protocol.
3.
The reference standard is used for physicochemical test.
Supporting Data
1.
Justification for the change in reference standard.
2.
Information demonstrating qualification of the proposed reference standards or materials (e.g., source,
characterization, certificate of analysis).
3.
Justification of the change to reference standard qualification protocol.
4.
Updated reference standard qualification protocol.
5.
Summary of stability testing and results to support the extension of reference standard shelf life.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  48
(Q) B.I.c Container Closure System
Description of Change
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.c.1. change in the immediate packaging/
primary
container
closure
system(s)
for
the
storage and shipment of the active biological
ingredient
(Qualitative and/or quantitative composition)
None
1-2,4, 5
II
1
1,3, 5
IA
Conditions
1. The proposed container closure system is at least equivalent to the approved container closure system with 
respect to its relevant properties.
Supporting Data
1.
Information on the proposed container closure system (e.g., description, composition, materials of
construction of primary packaging components, specifications).
2.
Data demonstrating the suitability of the container closure system (e.g. extractable/leachable testing).
3.
Results demonstrating that the proposed container closure system is at least equivalent to the approved
container closure system with respect to its relevant properties (e.g. results of transportation or interaction
studies, extractable/leachable studies).
4.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale active biological ingredient batches produced with the
proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre- change test results
do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme are
acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless otherwise justified.
Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real time stability studies to support the full shelf
life/hold-time of the active biological ingredient under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA
of any failures in these ongoing long-term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale
batches, the use of less than three(3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing
may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
5.
Comparative table of pre- and post-change specifications.
Description of Change
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.c.2 Change in the specifications parameters and/or limits of the immediate packaging / primary 
container closure system for the active biological substance, involving:
a. tightening of specification limits
8
1
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  49
b. addition of new specification parameters
3
1-3
IA
c. deletion
of
non-significant
specification 
parameter
1-2
1-2
IAIN
d. addition or replacement of a specification parameter 
as a result of safety issues
1-2
II
e. widening of an acceptance criterion
None
1-2
IB
(Q) B.I.c.3 Change in the test procedure for the immediate packaging of the active biological ingredient
a.
minor changes to an analytical procedure
4-7
1-3
IA
b.
replacement of an analytical procedure
6-7
1-3
IA
c. deletion of analytical procedure if an alternative test
procedure is already authorised
1-2
1-2
IA
Conditions:
1.
The deleted test has been demonstrated to be redundant with respect to the remaining tests or is no longer 
a pharmacopoeial requirement.
2.
The change to the specifications or analytical procedure does not affect the functional properties of the
container closure component nor result in a potential impact on the performance of the active biological
ingredient.
3.
The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
4.
No change in the acceptance criteria outside of the approved ranges.
5.
The new analytical procedure is of the same type.
6.
Results of method validation demonstrate that the new or modified analytical procedure is at least 
equivalent to the approved analytical procedure.
7.
The new or modified analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and 
sensitivity.
8.
The change is within the range of approved acceptance criteria or has been made to reflect new 
pharmacopoeial monograph specifications for the container closure component.
Supporting Data
1.
Updated, copy of the proposed specifications for the primary container closure system.
2.
Rationale for the change in specifications or analytical procedure for a primary container closure system.
3.
Description of the analytical procedure and, if applicable, validation data.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  50
(Q) B.I.d Stability
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.d.1 Change in the shelf life/hold-time for the active biological ingredient or for a stored intermediate 
of the active biological ingredient, involving:
(Q) B.I.d.1.a.1. reduction
None
1-5
IB
6
2-4
IA
(Q) B.I.d.1.a.3 extension
None
1- 5
II
1-5
1-2,5
IB
Conditions
1.
No changes to the container closure system in direct contact with the active biological ingredient with the
potential of impact on the active biological ingredient; or to the recommended storage conditions of the
active biological ingredient.
2.
The approved shelf life is at least 24 months.
3.
Full long-term stability data are available covering the proposed shelf life and are based on stability data
generated on at least three (3) commercial-scale batches.
4.
Stability data were generated in accordance with the approved stability protocol.
5.
Significant changes were not observed in the stability data.
6.
The reduction in the shelf life is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacturing or
because of stability concerns (i.e. problems arising during manufacturing or stability concerns should be
reported for evaluation).
Supporting Data
1.
Summary of stability testing and results (e.g., studies conducted, protocols used, results obtained).
2.
Proposed storage conditions and shelf life, as appropriate.
3.
Updated post-approval stability protocol and stability commitment.
4.
Justification of the change to the post-approval stability protocol or stability commitment.
5.
Results of stability testing (i.e. full real-time/real temperature stability data covering the proposed
shelf life generatedonatleast three (3) commercial scale batches). For intermediates,data toshow that
the extension of shelf life has no negative impact on the quality of the active biological ingredient.
Under special circumstances and with prior agreement with SAHPRA, interim stability testing results
and a commitment to notify SAHPRA of any failures in the ongoing long-term stability studies may be
provided.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  50
Description of Change
Conditions to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.d.1.b  Change in the storage conditions for the active biological substance, involving:
1. addition or change of storage conditions for the
active biological ingredient (e.g. relaxation or
tightening of temperature criterion
None
1-4
IB
1-2
1-3
IA
2. change in storage conditions of biological
active ingredient, when the stability studies
have not been performed in accordance with
the currently approved stability protocol
1
1-4
II
Conditions
1.
The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
2.
The change consists in the tightening of a temperature criterion within the approved ranges.
Supporting Data
1.
Proposed storage conditions and shelf life.
2.
Updated post-approval stability protocol and stability commitment.
3.
Justification of the change in the labelled storage conditions/cautionary statement.
4.
Results of stability testing (i.e. full real-time/real temperature stability data covering the proposed shelf life
generated on one (1) commercial scale batch).
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  51
Description of Change
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.I.d.1.c Change in the approved stability protocol / post-approval stability protocol of the active biological
substance , involving:
a. significant change to the post-approval stability
protocol or stability commitment such as deletion
of a test, replacement of an analytical procedure,
change in storage temperature
None
1- 6
IB
1
1-2,4- 6
IA
b. addition of time point(s) into the post-approval 
stability protocol
None
4-6
IA
c. addition of test(s) into the post-approval stability 
protocol
2
1,2, 4, 6
IA
d. deletion of time point(s) from the post-approval
stability protocol beyond the approved shelf life
None
4-6
IA
e. deletion of time point(s) from the post-approval 
stability protocol within the approved shelf life
3
4- 6
IA
Conditions
1.
For the replacement of an analytical procedure, the new analytical procedure maintains or tightens 
precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity.
2.
The addition of test(s) is not due to stability concerns or to the identification of new impurities.
3.
The approved active biological ingredient shelf life is at least 24 months.
Supporting Data
1.
Copies or summaries of analytical procedures, if new analytical procedures are used.
2.
Copies or summaries of validation reports, if new analytical procedures are used.
3.
Proposed storage conditions and or shelf life, as appropriate.
4.
Updated post-approval stability protocol and stability commitment.
5.
If applicable, stability testing results to support the change to the post-approval stability protocol or 
stability commitment (e.g., data to show greater reliability of the alternate test).
6.
Justification for the change to the post-approval stability protocol.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  52
12   APPENDIX 3: POST APPROVAL CHANGES TO THE FINAL PRODUCT
The examples presented in this appendix are intended to assist with the classification of changes made to the
quality information of the final product. The information summarised in the final product table provides
recommendations for:
(a)
the conditions to be fulfilled for a given change to be classified as either a Type II, Type IB, or Type IA change.
If any of the conditions outlined for a given change are not fulfilled, the change is automatically considered
the next higher level of change. For example, if any of the conditions recommended for a Type IB
amendment are not fulfilled, the change is considered a Type II amendment
(b)
the supporting data for a given change, either to be submitted to SAHPRA; and/or maintained by HCR. If
any of the supporting data outlined for a given change is not provided, is different or is not considered
applicable, adequate scientific justification should be provided; and (c) the reporting category (e.g., Type
II, Type IB and Type IA Quality Change).
It is important to note that SAHPRA reserves the right to request additional information or material as deemed
appropriate,ortodefineconditionsnotspecificallydescribedinthisdocumentinordertoallow them to adequately
assess the quality, safety or efficacy of a medicine. HCRs should contact SAHPRA if a change is not included in the
table and if it may have the potential to impact on medicine quality.
Supporting data should be provided according to the submission format accepted by SAHPRA. For example, for
SAHPRA to accept ICH CTD and/or ICH eCTD formatted submissions, the supporting data should be provided in the
appropriate sections of the CTD Modules (not as separate documents).
Quality Changes to Comply with Updated Compendia and/or Pharmacopeia
SAHPRA recognises the British Pharmacopoeia (BP), European Pharmacopoeia (Ph Eur) and United States
Pharmacopoeia (USP). Quality changes to approved compendial/pharmacopoeial materials (e.g., raw materials,
reagents, etc.), analytical procedures or assays solely to comply with updated compendial/pharmacopoeial
requirements is considered a minor change as long as the change is made within six (6) months of the
implementation of the updated compendial/pharmacopoeial requirements.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  53
Q) B. II. FINISHED PRODUCT
(Q) B.II.a Description and Composition of the Final Product [In this guideline, this section/code is expanded to also
cover changes to adjuvant and diluent]
Description of Change
Conditions
to be
Fulfilled
Supporting
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q) B.II.a.3 Change in the description or composition (excipients) of the final product, involving:
a. addition of a dosage form or change in the formulation
(e.g., lyophilised powder to liquid, change in the
amount of excipient, new diluent for lyophilised
product).
Note: Change in formulation does not include changes in
active biological ingredient(s) or adjuvants. A change
in active biological ingredient(s) or adjuvants requires
the
filing
of
a
new
application
for
marketing
authorisation.
HCRs
are
encouraged
to
contact
SAHPRA for further guidance.
None
1-10
II
b. change in fill volume (same concentration, different 
volume)
None
1,3,5,7,10
II
1-2
1,3,5,7
IB
1-3
5,7
IA
c. addition of a new presentation (e.g., addition of a new
pre-filled syringe where the approved presentation is
a vial for a medicine in a liquid dosage form)
None
1,5,7-10
II
Conditions
1. No changes classified as major in the manufacturing process to accommodate the new fill volume.
2. No change in the dose recommended.
3. Narrowing of fill volume while maintaining the lower limit of extractable volume.
Note: Changes in dosage form and/or presentation in some cases may necessitate the filing of a new application 
for marketing authorisation. HCRs are encouraged to contact SAHPRA for further guidance.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  54
Supporting Data
1. Revised final product labelling information (as applicable)
2. Characterisation data demonstrating that the conformation and immunogenicity of the active biological
ingredient is comparable in the new dosage form and/or formulation.
3. Description and composition of the dosage form if there are changes to the composition or dose.
4. Discussion of the components of the final product, as appropriate (e.g., choice of excipients,
compatibility of active biological ingredients and excipients, leachates, compatibility with new
container closure system (as appropriate)).
5. Information on the batch formula, manufacturing process and process controls, controls of critical steps
and intermediates, process validation and/or evaluation studies.
6. Control of excipients, if new excipients are proposed (e.g. specifications).
7. Information on specification(s), analytical procedures (if new analytical methods are used), validation of
analytical procedures (if new analytical methods are used), batch analyses (certificate of analysis for
three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches should be provided). Bracketing for multiple strength
products, container sizes and/or fills may be acceptable if scientifically justified.
8. Information on the container closure system and leachables and extractables, if any of the components
have changed (e.g., description, materials of construction, summary of specifications).
9. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the
proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test
results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability
programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless
otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability studies
to support the full shelf life/hold-time of the final product under its normal storage conditions and to
report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the
use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three batches and/or use of forced degradation
conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
10. Supporting clinical data or a justification why such studies are not needed.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  55
(Q) B.II.a.N1 Description and Composition of the Final product: Change to a Diluent
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting
Data
Amendment 
Type
Change to diluent, involving:
a. change in manufacturing process
none
1-5
II
  1, 3
1-4
IB
b.  replacement or addition to the source of
a
diluent
None
1-5
II
1-3
1-3
IB
c. change in facility used to manufacture a diluent (same
company)
1-2
3, 5
IA
d.  addition of a diluent filling line
1-2,4
1-3,5
IA
e. deletion of a diluent
None
None
IA
Conditions
1.
The diluent is water for injection (WFI) or a salt solution approved for parenteral human use (i.e. does 
not include an ingredient with a functional activity, e.g., a preservative).
2.
After reconstitution, there is no change in the final product specifications outside of the approved 
ranges.
3.
The proposed diluent is commercially available in the country/jurisdiction of SAHPRA.
4.
The addition of the diluent filling line is in an approved filling facility.
Supporting Data
1. Flow diagram (including process and in-process controls) of the proposed manufacturing process (es) 
and a brief narrative description of the proposed manufacturing process(es).
2. Updated, copy of the proposed specifications for the diluent.
3. Descriptionof the batches and summary of results as quantitative data, in a comparative tabular format,
for at least three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches of the approved and proposed diluent.
Comparative test results for the approved diluent do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant
historical testing results are acceptable.
4. Updated stability data on the product reconstituted with the new diluent.
5. Evidence of facility GMP compliance.
Note: Changes to diluents containing adjuvants and/or active biological ingredients are considered final 
products and as such the corresponding changes to final product, not diluent, should be applied.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  56
(Q) B.II.a.N2 Description and Composition of the Final Product: Change to an Adjuvant
Note: Change in type/structure of a chemical adjuvant, in the type of a biological adjuvant or in a component of
a biological adjuvant may necessitate the filing of a new application for marketing authorisation. HCRs are
encouraged to contact SAHPRA for further guidance.
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment 
Type
(Q) B.II.a.N2.1 Change involving an approved chemical/synthetic adjuvant:
a.
change in supplier of a chemical/synthetic 
adjuvant
None
4-6,10
IB
1-2
5
IA
b. change in manufacture of a chemical/synthetic 
adjuvant
None
4-6,10
IB
c. change in specifications of a chemical/synthetic
adjuvant
(including
the
tests
and/or
the
analytical procedures)
None
6-10
IB
1,3
7-9
IA
(Q) B.II.a.N2.2 Change involving a biological adjuvant
a.  change in supplier of a biological adjuvant
None
1-7,10-
11,12
II
b.  change in manufacture of a biological adjuvant
None
1-7,10-11
II
4
1-5,7
IB
c. change in specifications of a biological adjuvant 
(including
the
tests
and/or
the
analytical 
procedures)
None
6-10
IB
1,3
7-9
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  57
Conditions
1. Any change in specifications of the adjuvant is within the approved ranges (i.e. 
tightening of acceptance criteria).
2. The adjuvant is an aluminium salt.
3. The change in specifications consists in the addition of a new test or in a minor change to an analytical 
procedure.
4. No change in the supplier of the adjuvant.
Supporting Data
1. Information assessing the risk with respect to potential contamination with adventitious agents (e.g.,
impact on the viral clearance studies, BSE/TSE risk).
2. Information on the quality and controls of the materials (e.g., raw materials, starting materials) used
in the manufacture of the proposed adjuvant.
3. Information on the controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process and on
intermediates of the proposed adjuvant.
4. Process validation and/or evaluation studies (e.g., for manufacturing of the adjuvant) unless justified.
5. Description of the general properties including stability, characteristic features and characterisation
data of the adjuvant, as appropriate.
6. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with
the proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change
test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability
programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three months’ testing unless
otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability
studies to support the full shelf life/hold-time of the final product under its normal storage conditions
and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long-term stability studies. Matrixing,
bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three (3) batches and/or use of forced
degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by
SAHPRA.
7. Updated copy of the proposed specifications for the adjuvant (and updated analytical procedures if
applicable).
8. Copies or summaries of analytical procedures, if new analytical procedures are used.
9. Copies or summaries of validation reports, if new analytical procedures are used.
10. Description of the batches and summary of results as quantitative data, in a comparative tabular
format, for at least three (3) consecutive commercial scale batches of the final product with the
approved and proposed adjuvant, as applicable.
11. Supporting non-clinical and clinical data, if applicable.
12. Evidence of facility GMP compliance.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  58
(Q) B.II.b Manufacture
Description of Change
Conditions 
to be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q) B.II.b.1 Replacement or addition of manufacturing site for part or all of the manufacturing process of the 
finished product
a. secondary packaging site
2-3
1-3
IAIN
b. primary packaging site
None
1-7
II
1-5
1-3, 5-8
IB
c. site where any manufacturing operation(s) take place,
except batch release, batch control, and secondary packaging,
for biological/immunological medicinal products, or for
pharmaceutical
forms
manufactured
by
complex
manufacturing process
1-7
II
d. site which requires an initial or product specific inspection
1-7
II
e. site where any manufacturing operation(s) take place,
except batch release, batch control, and secondary packaging
for non-sterile medicinal product
1-7
IB
f.
N/A
g. conversion of a drug product manufacturing facility from 
single product to multiproduct facility
none
9-10
IB
h. deletion of a final product manufacturing facility or 
packaging facility
None
1
IB
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05 v6
Page  59
Conditions
1. The proposed facility is an approved formulation/filling facility (for the same company/HCR).
2. No change in the composition, manufacturing process and final product specifications.
3. No change in the container/closure system or storage condition.
4. The same validated manufacturing process is used.
5. The newly introduced product is in the same family of product(s) or therapeutic classification as the one
of those already approved at the site and uses the same filling process/equipment.
Supporting Data
1. Name, address, and responsibility of the proposed production facility involved in manufacturing and
testing.
2. Evidence of facility GMP compliance.
3. Confirmation that the description of the manufacturing process of the drug product has not changed as a
result of the submission (other than the change in facility), or a revised description of the manufacturing
process.
4. Comparative description of the manufacturing process, if different from the approved process, and
information on the controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process and on the
intermediate of the proposed final product.
5. Summary of the process validation studies and results.
6. Description of the batches and summary of in-process control and release testing results as quantitative
data, in a comparative tabular format, for at least three consecutive commercial-scale batches of the pre-
change and post-change drug product. Comparative pre-change test results do not need to be generated
concurrently; relevant historical testing results are acceptable. Bracketing for multiple- strength products,
container sizes and/or fills may be acceptable if scientifically justified.
7. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the
proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test
results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability
programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimumof three (3) monthstesting unless otherwise
justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability studies to support
the full shelf life/hold-time of the final product under its normal storage conditions and to report to
SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long-term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of
smaller scale batches, the use of less than three (3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions
for stability testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
8. Rationale for considering the proposed formulation/filling suite as equivalent.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  60
9. Information describing the change-over procedures for shared product-contact equipment and the
segregation procedures, as applicable. If there are no revisions, a signed attestation from the manufacturer
that no changes were made to the changeover procedures.
10. Cleaning procedures (including data in a summary validation report and the cleaning protocol for the
introduction of new products, as applicable) demonstrating lack of carry-over or cross-contamination.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  61
Description of Change
Conditions to
be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q) B.II.b.2. Change to importer, batch release arrangements and quality control (QC) testing of the final product, 
involving:
Note: Transfer of testing to a different facility within a GMP-approved site is not considered to be a change and 
handled by GMP.
(Q) B.II.b.2.b replacement or addition of a site where 
batch
control/testing
takes
place
for
a
biological/immunological product and any of the test 
methods performed at the site is a 
biological/immunological method
None
1-2
II
(Q) B.II.b.2.c. replacement or addition of a manufacturer
responsible for importation and/or batch release
None
1-2
II
(Q) B.II.b.2.c.3 Including batch control/testing for a
biological/immunological product and any of the test
methods
performed
at
that
site
is
a
biological/immunological/immunological
chemical
method
1-2
II
(Q) B.II.b.2.d transfer of the QC testing activities for a non-
pharmacopoeial assay (in-house) to a new company or
to a different facility within the same company
None
1-2
IB
(Q) B.II.b.2.e transfer of QC testing activities for a 
pharmacopoeial assay to a new company
1
1-2
IB
Conditions
1. The transferred QC test is not a potency assay or a bioassay.
Supporting Data
1. Information demonstrating technology transfer qualification(s).
2. Evidence that the new company/facility is GMP compliant.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  62
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment 
Type
(Q) B.II.b.3 Change in the manufacturing process of the final product including an intermediate used in the 
manufacture of the finished product
(Q) B.II.b.3.b substantial changes to a manufacturing process that 
may have a significant impact on the quality, safety and efficacy of 
the medicinal product
None
1-7
II
(Q) B.II.b.3.c the product is a biologic/immunologic medicinal 
product and the change requires an assessment of comparability
l
1-7
II
(Q) B.II.b.3.g addition of a new step (e.g. filtration)
3
1-4, 7
IB
(Q) B.II.3.h addition or replacement of equipment (e.g. formulation
tank, filter housing, filling line and head, and lyophilizer) within the 
existing filling areas
None
1-3, 6, 8
II
5
3
IB
(Q) B.II.b.3.i. addition or replacement of equipment (e.g., lyophilizer)
in a new area (e.g., adjacent room)
None
1-3
IB
(Q) B.II.b.4 Change in batch size including batch size ranges (upscaling and downscaling) of the final product
a. scale-up of the manufacturing process at the formulation/filling
stage
1-4
1,3 -4, 7, 8
IB
b. addition of a new scale bracketed by the approved scales or 
scale-down of the manufacturing process
1-4
1-4, 6, 8
IA
  Conditions:
1.
The proposed  scale uses similar/comparable    equipment to that approved (N.B. change in equipment size is not 
considered as using similar/comparable equipment).
2.
Any changes to the manufacturing process and/or to the in-process controls are only those necessitated by 
the change in batch size (e.g. the same formulation, controls, standard operating procedures (SOPs)  are utilized.)
3.
The change should not be a result of recurring events having arisen during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
4.
No change in the principle of the sterilization procedures of the final product.
5.
For product contact  equipment,  the change is considered 'like for like' (i.e. in terms of product-contact 
material/equipment size).
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  63
Supporting Data
1. Description of the manufacturing process if different from the approved process and information on the
controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process and on the intermediate of the proposed
final product.
2. Information on the in-process control testing, as applicable.
3. Process validation and/or evaluation studies (e.g., media fills, as appropriate). The proposed validation
protocol is acceptable, but data could be requested.
4. Description of the batches and summary of results as quantitative data, in a comparative tabular format, for
atleastthree(3)consecutivecommercialscalebatchesoftheapprovedandproposedfinal product. Bracketing
for multiple strength products, container sizes and/or fills may be acceptable if scientifically justified.
Comparative pre-change test results do not need to be generated concurrently
5. Summary of stability testing and results (e.g., studies conducted, protocols used, results obtained).
6. Commitment to place the first commercial scale batch of the final product manufactured using the proposed
formulation/filling suite into the stability program, and to notify SAHPRA of any failures in the ongoing
stability studies.
7. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the proposed
changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test results do not
need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme are acceptable.
The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the
manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability studies to support the full shelf life/hold-time of
the final product under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing
long- term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three
batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified
and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
8. Rationale for regarding the equipment as similar/comparable, as applicable.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  64
Description of Change
Conditions 
to be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.b.5 Change to in-process tests and/or limits applied during the manufacturing process of the finished 
product:
a.   tightening of in-process limits
2,3,7
1,4
IA
b.
addition of new in-process test and limits
2,3,6,
1-5, 8
IA
c.   deletion of a non-significant in-process test
2- 4
1,4,7
IAIN
d. deletion of an in-process test which may have a
significant effect on the overall quality of the final
product
None
1-4,6,8
II
e. widening of the approved in-process limits
None
1-4,6,8
II
1-3
1,4,5,8
IB
f. Addition or replacement of an in-process test as a result
of a safety or quality issue
None
1-4, 6, 8
IB
g. change in in-process controls testing site
Note: Transfer of in-process control testing to a different
facility within a GMP-approved site is not considered to be
a reportable change but is treated as a minor GMP change
and reviewed during inspections.
1-3, 5-6
9
IA
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  65
Conditions
1. There is no change in drug product specifications outside of the approved ranges.
2. There is no change in the impurity profile of the drug product outside the approved limits.
3. The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability concerns
4. The test does not concern a critical parameter, e.g., content, impurities, any critical physical characteristics or 
microbial purity.
5. The replaced analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity, if 
applicable.
6. There is no change in the in-process control limits outside of the approved limits.
7. The test procedure remains the same, or changes in the test procedure are minor.
Supporting Data
1.
Revised information on the controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process and on 
intermediates of the proposed drug substance.
2.
Updated drug product specifications if changed.
3.
Copies or summaries of analytical procedures if new analytical procedures are used.
4.
Comparative table or description, where applicable, of current and proposed in-process tests.
5.
Descriptionofthebatchesandsummaryofin-processcontrolandreleasetestingresultsasquantitative data,
in a comparative tabular format, for one commercial-scale batch of the pre-change and post change drug
product (certificates of analysis should be provided). Comparative pre-change test results do not need to be
generated concurrently; relevant historical testing results are acceptable. Batch data on the next two (2)
full- production batches should be made available on request and reported by the marketing authorisation
holder if outside specification (with proposed action). The use of a smaller-scale batch may be acceptable
where justified and agreed by the NRA.
6.
Descriptionofthebatchesandsummaryofin-processcontrolandreleasetestingresultsasquantitative data,
in a comparative tabular format, for at least three (3) consecutive commercial-scale batches of the pre-
change and post-change drug product (certificates of analysis should be provided). Comparative pre change
test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical testing results are acceptable.
7.
Justification/risk assessment showing that the attribute is non-significant.
8.
Justification for the new in-process test and limits.
9.
Evidence that the new company/facility is GMP compliant.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  66
(Q) B.II.c Control of Excipients
Description of Change
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q) B.II.c.1. Change in the specifications parameters and/or limits of an excipient, involving:
Note: Excludes adjuvants, refer to adjuvant specific changes.
a. tightening of specification limits
3-4, 6, 7
1
IA
b. addition of a new specification parameter to the 
specification with its corresponding test methods
4
1-3
IA
c.
deletion   of   a non-significant specification 
parameter
5, 8
1,2
IAIN
d. change outside the approved specification limit 
range/widening of specification
None
1,3
II
e.
deletion of specification parameter which may have
a significant effect on the overall quality of the
finished product
None
1,4
II
(Q) B.II.c.2 Change in the test procedure for an excipient
a.
minor
changes
to
an
approved
analytical 
procedure
None
1-2
IA
b. deletion of analytical procedure
5, 8
1,4
IA
c.
substantial
change
to
or
replacement
of
a
biological/immunological/immunochemical test method
or a method using a biological reagent
None
1,4
II
d. replacement of an analytical procedure
1-3
1-2
IB
e. a change from an in-house analytical procedure to a 
recognised compendial analytical procedure
None
1-2
IA
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page   67
Registration of Medicines
Biological Medicine Amendment Guideline
Conditions
1. Results of method validation demonstrate that the proposed analytical procedure is at least equivalent to 
the approved analytical procedure.
2. The replaced analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity.
3. The change is within the range of approved acceptance criteria or has been made to reflect new 
pharmacopoeial monograph specifications for the excipient.
4. Acceptance criterion for residual solvents is within recognised or approved acceptance limits e.g. within 
ICH limits for a Class 3 residual solvent or pharmacopoeial requirements.
5. The deleted test has been demonstrated to be redundant with respect to the remaining tests or is no 
longer a pharmacopoeial requirement.
6. The analytical procedure remains the same, or changes in the test procedure are minor.
7. The change does not result from unexpected events arising during manufacture, e.g. new unqualified 
impurity; change in total impurity limits.
8. An alternative test analytical procedure is already authorised for the specification parameter/test and this 
procedure has not been added through a minor change submission.
Supporting Data
1. Updated excipient specifications.
2. Where an in-house analytical procedure is used and a recognised compendial standard is claimed, results of 
an equivalency study between the in-house and compendial methods.
3. Justification of the proposed excipient specifications (e.g., demonstration of the suitability of the monograph
to control the excipient and potential impact on the performance of the final product).
4. Justification for deletion or replacement of a test.
Description of Change (Q) B.II.c.3 Change in source of an
excipients or reagent with TSE risk:
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a) Change from TSE risk material (e.g., animal) to vegetable or synthetic origin
1.
for excipients or reagents not used in the
manufacture
of
a
biological/immunological
active
substance
or
in
a
biological/immunological medicinal
None
1,3,5,6
IA
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page   68
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
2.
for
excipients
or
reagents
used
in
the
manufacture
of
a
biological/immunological
active
substance
or
in
a
biological/immunological medicinal product
None
1,3,5,6
IB
(Q) B.II.c.3.b. change or introduction of a TSE risk
material or replacement of a TSE risk material from
a different TSE risk material, not covered by TSE
certificate of suitability
None
2-7
II
(Q) B.II.c.3.b.N1 Replacement in the source of an
excipient from a TSE risk source to a different TSE
risk source
5
2-7
IB
(Q) B.II.c.4 Change in synthesis or recovery of a non-
pharmacopoeial excipient (when described in the
dossier) or a novel excipient
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
document
Amendment 
type
(Q) B.II.c.4 a. minor change in synthesis or recovery of a
non- pharmacopoeial excipient or a novel excipient
7-8
5
IA
(Q) B.II.c.4 b. the specifications are affected or there is a
change in physico-chemical properties of the excipient
which may affect the quality of the finished product
2-7
II
(Q)
B.II.c.4.c.
the
excipient
is
a
biological
of
immunological
substance.
Note:
excludes
biological adjuvants, refer to adjuvant specific
changes.
None
2-7
II
1,2
2-7
IA
2
2-3,5-7
IB
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page   69
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
(Q) B.II.c.4.d change in supplier for a plasma-derived 
excipient (e.g., human serum albumin)
None
4-8
II
3-4
5,6,9
IB
(Q) B.II.c.4.e change in supplier of an excipient of non-
biological origin or of biological origin (excluding
plasma- derived excipient)
Note: excludes chemical/synthetic adjuvants, refer to
adjuvant specific changes.
None
2, 3,5-7
IB
1,5
3
IA
(Q) B.II.c.4.f change in excipient testing site
1
10
IA
Conditions
1. No change in the specifications of the excipient or final product outside of the approved ranges.
2. The change does not concern a human plasma-derived excipient.
3. The human plasma-derived excipient from the new supplier is an approved medicinal product and no
manufacturing changes were made by the supplier of the new excipient since its last approval in South
Africa country/jurisdiction.
4. The excipient does not influence the structure/conformation of the active ingredient.
5. The TSE risk source is covered by a TSE certificate of suitability and is of the same or lower TSE risk 
compared to the previously approved material.
6. Any new excipient does not require the assessment of viral safety data.
7. The synthetic route and specifications are identical and there is no change in qualitative and quantitative
impurity profile (excluding residual solvents, provided they are controlled in accordance with ICH/VICH
limits), or in physico-chemical properties.
8. Adjuvants are excluded.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  70
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Supporting Data
1.
Declaration from the manufacturer of the excipient that it is entirely of vegetable or synthetic origin.
2.
Details of the source of the excipient (e.g., animal species, country of origin) and the steps
undertaken in processing to minimise the risk of TSE exposure.
3.
Information demonstrating comparability in terms of physico-chemical characterisation and impurity
profile of the proposed excipient with the approved excipient.
4.
Information on the manufacturing process and on the controls performed at critical steps of the
manufacturing process and on the intermediate of the proposed excipient.
5.
Description of the batches and summary of results as quantitative data, in a comparative tabular
format, for at least three (3) commercial scale batches of the proposed excipient.
6.
Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability
indicating parameters with at least three commercial scale final product batches produced with the
proposed changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre- change
test results do not need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability
programme are acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless
otherwise justified. Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability
studies to support the full shelf life /hold-time of the final product under its normal storage
conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing long-term stability studies.
Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three (3) batches and/or
useofforceddegradationconditionsforstabilitytestingmaybeacceptablewherejustified and agreed
upon by SAHPRA.
7.
Information assessing the risk with respect to potential contamination with adventitious agents (e.g.,
impact on the viral clearance studies, BSE/TSE risk) including viral safety documentation where
necessary.
8.
Complete manufacturing and clinical safety data to support the use of the proposed human plasma-
derived excipient.
9.
Letter from the supplier certifying that no changes were made to the plasma derived excipient
compared to the currently approved corresponding medicinal product.
10.
Evidence that the new company/facility works under acceptable quality standards.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  71
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
(Q) B.II Control of Final Product
Description of Change
Conditions
to be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment 
Type
(Q) B.ll.d.1 Change in the specifications used to release the final product, involving:
(Q) B.ll.d.1.a. tightening of an acceptance criterion
1,3,6,7
1
IA
(Q) B.ll.d.1.b. tightening of specifications limits for
medicinal
products
subject
to
official
control
authority batch release
1,3,6,7
1
IAIN
(Q)
B.ll.d.1.c.
addition
of
a
new
specification
parameter
to
the
specification
with
its
corresponding test method
1-2, 7
1-3, 5
IA
(Q) B.ll.d.1.d. deletion of non-significant specification
parameter (e.g deletion of an obsolete parameter
such as odour, taste or identification test for a
colouring or flavouring material
5,7
1, 6
IA
(Q)
B.ll.d.1.e.
change
outside
the
approved
specifications limits or widening of specification
limits
None
1,5 7
II
(Q) B.ll.d.1.f. deletion of a specification parameter
which may have a significant effect on the overall
quality of finished product
None
1,6 7
II
(Q)B.II.d.2 Change in the analytical procedure for the final product, involving:
a. minor changes to an approved analytical 
procedure
none
1-5
IB
1 ,3-5
2, 4 5
IA
b. deletion of a test analytical procedure
None
1,6.7
II
c. substantial change to, or replacement of a
biological/immunological/immunochemical
test
method or a method using a biological reagent
1-5
II
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  72
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
d. other changes to an analytical procedure, including
replacement
or
addition
of
an
analytical
procedure
None
1-5
IB
4,8
1,4,5
IA
e. Update of the analytical procedure to comply with
updated monograph or change from an in-house
analytical procedure to a recognised compendia
analytical procedure
none
1-5
IB
1,5
1,5,7
IB
Conditions
1. There is no change in the limits/acceptance criteria outside of the approved ranges for the approved assays.
2. The additional test is not intended to monitor new impurity species.
3. The method of analysis is the same (e.g., a change in column length or temperature, but not a different 
type of column or method) and no new impurities are detected.
4. The modified analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and sensitivity.
5. The change does not concern potency testing.
6. Acceptance criterion for residual solvents is within recognised or approved acceptance limits,
e.g. within ICH limits for a Class 3 residual solvent or pharmacopoeial requirements.
7. The change does not result from unexpected events arising during manufacture, e.g., new unqualified 
impurity in total impurity limits.
8. The change is from a pharmacopoeial assay to another pharmacopoeial assay.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  73
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Supporting Data
1.
An updated copy of the proposed drug product specification.
2.
Copies or summaries of analytical procedures if new analytical procedures are used.
3.
Validation/qualification results if new analytical procedures are used.
4.
Comparative results demonstrating that the approved and proposed analytical procedures are 
equivalent.
5.
Justification for the change to the analytical procedure (e.g., demonstration of the suitability of the
analytical procedure in monitoring the drug product, including the degradation products) or for the
change to the specification (e.g., demonstration of the suitability of the revised acceptance criterion to
control the drug product).
6.
Justification for the deletion of the test (e.g., demonstration of the suitability of the revised specification
in controlling the final product).
7.
Documented evidence that consistency of quality and of the production process are maintained.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  74
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
(Q) B.II.d.N1. Reference Standards or Materials
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment
Type
a. qualification of a new reference standard against a 
new primary international standard
None
1-2
IB
b. change the reference standard from in-house (no
relationship
with
international
standard)
to
pharmacopoeial or international standard
None
1-2
IA
c. qualification of a new lot of reference standard
against the approved reference standard (including
qualification of a new lot of a secondary reference
standard against the approved primary standard)
1
1-2
IA
d. change to reference standard qualification protocol
None
3-4
IB
e. extension of reference standard shelf life
2
5
IB
Conditions
1. The qualification of a new standard is made in accordance with an approved protocol.
2. The extension of the reference standard shelf life is made in accordance with an approved protocol.
Supporting Data
1. Revised product labelling to reflect the change in reference standard (as applicable).
2. Information demonstrating qualification(s) of the proposed reference standards or materials (e.g., 
source, characterisation, certificate of analysis).
3. Justification of the change to reference standard qualification protocol.
4. Updated reference standard qualification protocol.
5. Summary of stability testing and results or retest data to support the extension of reference standard shelf 
life.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  75
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
(Q) B.II.e Container Closure System
(Q) B.II.e.1. Change in immediate packaging of the 
finished product
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q) B.II.e.1.a.3. modification of a primary container
closure system (e.g., new coating, adhesive, stopper,
type of glass and etc.)
Note: the addition of a new container closure system (e.g.,
addition of a pre-filled syringe where the currently
approved presentation is a vial only) is considered a
change in presentation
None
1-6
II
1-3
3
IA
(Q) B.II.e.1.b Change in type of container or addition of a 
new container
Conditions
to
be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment
Type
(Q)B.II.e.1.b.2
Sterile
medicinal
products
and
biological /Immunological medicinal product
None
1-6
II
(Q) B.II.e.1.b.N2. addition of a secondary functional
container closure system (e.g., pre- filled auto
injector)
None
1-3,6
IB
(Q) B.II.e.1.b.N2.1 (Q) change from a reusable container
to a disposable container with no changes in product-
contact material (e.g., change from reusable pen to
disposable pen)
None
1,3,6
IB
(Q) B.II.e.1.b.3. deletion of a container closure system
None
1
IB
Conditions
1.
No change in the type of container closure or materials of construction.
2.
No change in the shape or dimensions of the container closure.
3.
The change is made only to improve the quality of the container and does not modify the product contact material
(for example, increased thickness of the glass vial without changing interior dimensions).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  76
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Supporting Data
1. Revised product labelling information, as appropriate.
2. For sterile products, process validation and/or evaluation studies, or provide equivalency rationale. For a
secondary functional container closure system, validation testing report.
3. Information on the proposed container closure system, as appropriate (e.g., description, materials of
construction of primary/secondary packaging components, performance specifications).
4. Results demonstrating protection against leakage, no leaching of undesirable substance, compatibility with
the product, and results from the toxicity and the biological reactivity tests.
5. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the proposed
changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test results do not
need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme are acceptable.
The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the
manufacturer shall commit to undertake real time stability studies to support the full shelf life /hold-time of
the final product under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these ongoing
long-term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less than three
(3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable where justified
and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
6. Information demonstrating suitability of the proposed container/closure system with respect to its relevant
properties (e.g., results from last media fills, results of transportation and/or interaction studies
demonstrating preservation of protein integrity and maintenance of the sterility for sterile products,
maintenance of the sterility in multi-dose container, user testing , etc.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  77
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Description of Change
Conditions to be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.e.2. Change in the specifications’ parameters and/or limits of the immediate packaging or a primary
container closure component or functional secondary container closure component of the final product:
a. tightening of specification limits
8
1
IA
b. addition of new specification parameter
3
1-2
IA
c.  deletion of non-significant specification parameter
1-2
1-2
IA
d. addition or replacement of a specification parameter 
as a result of a safety or quality issue
None
1-2
IB
e. widening of specification limits
None
1-2
IB
(Q) B.II.e.3. Change in analytical procedure for the immediate packaging / primary container closure 
component or functional secondary container closure component of the final product, involving:
a. minor changes to an analytical procedure
4-7
1-3
IA
b. other changes to analytical procedure, including 
replacement or addition of an analytical procedure
6-7
1-3
IA
c. deletion of analytical procedure if an alternative 
analytical procedure is already authorised
9
1
IA
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  78
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Conditions
1. The deleted test has been demonstrated to be redundant with respect to the remaining tests or is no 
longer a pharmacopoeial requirement.
2. The change to the specifications does not affect the functional properties of the container closure 
component nor result in a potential impact on the performance of the final product.
3. The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
4. No change in the acceptance criteria outside of the approved ranges.
5. The new analytical procedure is of the same type.
6. Results of method validation demonstrate that the new or modified analytical procedure is at least 
equivalent to the approved analytical procedure.
7. The new or modified analytical procedure maintains or tightens precision, accuracy, specificity and 
sensitivity.
8. The change is within the range of approved acceptance criteria or has been made to reflect new 
pharmacopoeial monograph specifications for the container closure component.
Supporting Data
1. Updated, copy of the proposed specifications or analytical procedure for the primary or functional 
secondary container closure component
2. Rationale for the change in specifications for a primary container closure component.
3. Description of the analytical procedure and, if applicable, validation data.
(Q) B.II.e.4. Change in shape or dimensions of the 
container or closure (immediate packaging)
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
  a. non-sterile medicinal products
1,3,4,5
IA
b. the change in shape or dimensions concerns a
fundamental part of the packaging material, which may
have a significant impact on the delivery, use, safety or
stability of the finished product
None
1-6
II
c. sterile medicinal products
1,2,3,4,5
IB
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  79
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Conditions:
1. No change in the qualitative or quantitative composition of the container.
2. The change does not concern a fundamental part of the packaging material, which affects the delivery, use,
safety or stability of the finished product.
3. In case of a change in the headspace or a change in the surface/volume ratio, stability studies in accordance
with the relevant guidelines have been started and relevant stability parameters have been assessed in at
least two pilot scale (three for biological/immunological medicinal products) or industrial scale batches and
at least three (3) months (six months for biological/immunological medicinal products) stability data are at
the disposal of the applicant. Assurance is given that these studies will be finalised and that data will be
provided immediately to the competent authorities if it is outside specifications or potentially outside
specifications at the end of the approved shelf life (with proposed action).
Supporting data:
1. Revised product labelling information, as appropriate.
2. For sterile products, process validation and/or evaluation studies, or provide equivalency rationale. For a
secondary functional container closure system, validation testing report.
3. Information on the proposed container closure system, as appropriate (e.g., description, materials of
construction of primary/secondary packaging components, performance specifications).
4. Resultsdemonstratingprotectionagainstleakage,noleachingof undesirable substance,compatibility with
the product, and results from the toxicity and the biological reactivity tests.
5. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the proposed
changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test results do not
need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme are
acceptable. The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months’ testing unless otherwise justified.
Additionally, the manufacturer shall commit to undertake real-time stability studies to support the full
shelf life /hold-time of the final product under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of
any failures in these ongoing long-term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale
batches, the use of less than three (3) batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability
testing may be acceptable where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
6. Information demonstrating suitability of the proposed container/closure system with respect to its
relevant properties (e.g., results from last media fills, results of transportation and/or interaction studies
demonstrating preservation of protein integrity and maintenance of the sterility for sterile products,
maintenance of the sterility in multi-dose container, user testing, etc.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Page  80
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
(Q) B.II.e.5 Change in pack size of the finished product
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.e.5.a. Change in the number of units (e.g. ampoules, etc.) in a pack:
1. change within a range of the currently approved 
pack sizes
1,2
1,3
IAIN
2. change outside the range of the currently approved 
pack sizes
1,2,3
IB
(Q) B.II.e.5.b. deletion of pack size(s)
3
1,2
IA
(Q) B.II.e.5.c Change in the fill weight/fill volume of
sterile multidose (or single-dose, partial use) parenteral
medicinal products, including biological/immunological
medicinal products
None
1,2,3
II
Conditions:
1.
The new pack size should be consistent with the posology and treatment duration as approved in the 
Summary of Product Characteristics.
2.
The primary packaging material remains the same.
3.
The remaining product presentation(s) must be adequate for the dosing instructions and treatment duration
as mentioned in the Summary of Product Characteristics.
Supporting Data:
1.
Amendment to the relevant section of the dossier
2.
Justification for the new fill weight /fill volume.
3.
Stability data or declaration that stability studies will be conducted in accordance with the relevant 
stability guideline.
4.
Justification for the new/remaining pack-size, showing that the new/remaining size is/are consistent with
the dosage regimen and duration of treatment as approved in the summary of product characteristics.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v5
Page 80
(Q) B.II.e.6. Change in any part of the (primary)
packaging material not in contact with the finished
product formulation (such as colour of flip-off caps,
colour code rings on ampoules, change of needle shield
(different plastic used)
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
documents
Amendment Type
a. change that affects the product information
1
1
IAIN
b. change that does not affect the product information
1
1
IA
Conditions:
1.
The change does not concern a part of the packaging material, which affects the delivery, use, safety or 
stability of the finished product.
Supporting documents:
1.
Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossier, including revised product information as 
appropriate.
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.e.7 Change in the supplier of packaging components or devices (when mentioned in the dossier)
a. deletion of a supplier
None
None
IA
b. replacement or addition of a supplier
None
1-3
IB
1-2
2
IA
Conditions
1. No change in the type of container closure, materials of construction, shape, dimensions or in the 
sterilisation process for a sterile container closure component.
2. No change in the specifications of the container closure component outside of the approved ranges.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 81
Supporting Data
1. Data demonstrating the suitability of the container closure system (e.g., extractable/leachable testing).
2. Information on the proposed container closure system (e.g. description, materials of construction of
primary packaging components, specifications).
3. Comparative pre- and post-change test results for the manufacturer’s characterised key stability indicating
parameters with at least three (3) commercial scale final product batches produced with the proposed
changes under real-time/real temperature testing conditions. Comparative pre-change test results do not
need to be generated concurrently; relevant historical results for lots on stability programme isacceptable.
The data should cover a minimum of three (3) months testing unless otherwise justified. Additionally, the
manufacturershallcommittoundertakereal-timestabilitystudiestosupport the full shelf life/hold-time of
the final product under its normal storage conditions and to report to SAHPRA of any failures in these
ongoing long-term stability studies. Matrixing, bracketing, the use of smaller scale batches, the use of less
than three batches and/or use of forced degradation conditions for stability testing may be acceptable
where justified and agreed upon by SAHPRA.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 82
Q) B.II.f Stability
Description of Change
Conditions to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.f.1 . Change in the shelf life or storage conditions for the final product, involving:
a. reduction (includes reduction as 1.) packaged for
sale, 2.) after opening and 3.) after dilution or
reconstitution)
None
1-5
IB
6
2-4
IAIN
b. extension (includes extension of shelf life of the
final product as 1.) packaged for sale, 2.) after
opening and 3.) after dilution or reconstitution)
None
1-5
IB
1-5
1-2,5
IB
c. change in storage conditions of the biological
medicinal products, when the stability studies have
not been performed in accordance with an
approved stability protocol
None
1-5
II
Conditions
1. No changes to the container closure system in direct contact with the final product with the potential of 
impact on the final product; or to the recommended storage conditions of the final product.
2. The approved shelf life is at least 24 months.
3. Full long-term stability data are available covering the proposed shelf life and are based on stability data 
generated on at least three (3) commercial-scale batches.
4. Stability data were generated in accordance with the approved stability protocol.
5. Significant changes were not observed in the stability data.
6. The reduction in the shelf life is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacturing or because
of stability concerns (i.e. problems arising during manufacturing or stability concerns should be reported for
evaluation).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 83
Supporting Data
1. Summary of stability testing and results (e.g., studies conducted, protocols used, results obtained).
2. Proposed storage conditions and shelf life, as appropriate.
3. Updated, post-approval stability protocol.
4. Justification of the change to the post-approval stability protocol or stability commitment.
5. Results of stability testing under real-time/real temperature conditions covering the proposed shelf life 
generated on at least three (3) commercial scale batches.
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.f.1.d . Change in the labelled storage conditions for the final product or the diluted or reconstituted 
medicine, involving:
1. addition or change of storage condition(s) for the
final product, diluted or reconstituted medicine
(e.g., relaxation or tightening of a temperature
criterion,
addition
or
change
of
controlled
temperature chain conditions)
None
1-4,6
IB
1-2
1-4
IA
2. addition of a cautionary statement (e.g., do not 
freeze)
1
1-2,4-5
IA
3. deletion of a cautionary statement (e.g. do not 
freeze)
None
1-2,4,6
IB
Conditions
1. The change is not necessitated by recurring events arising during manufacture or because of stability 
concerns.
2. The change consists in the tightening of a temperature criterion within the approved ranges.
Supporting Data
1. Revised product labelling information, as applicable.
2. Proposed storage conditions and shelf life.
3. Updated, post-approval stability protocol (and stability commitment).
4. Justification of the change in the labelled storage conditions/cautionary statement.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 84
 
5. Results of stability testing under real-time/real temperature stability conditions covering the proposed shelf
life generated on one (1) commercial scale batch, unless otherwise justified.
6. Results of stability testing under real-time/real temperature conditions covering the proposed shelf life 
generated on at least three (3) commercial scale batches, unless otherwise justified.
Description of Change
Conditions
to
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
(Q) B.II.f.1.e. Change to an approved stability protocol of the final product, involving: [NB this code has been 
expanded to include 6 sub-codes as listed below]
1. major change to the approved stability protocol or
stability commitment such as deletion of a test,
replacement of an analytical procedure, change in
storage temperature
None
1-6
IB
2. addition of time point(s) into the post-approval 
stability protocol
None
4-5
IA
3. addition of test(s) into the post-approval stability 
protocol
1
4-5
IA
4. deletion of time point(s) from the post-approval 
stability protocol beyond the approved shelf life
None
4-5
IA
5. deletion of time point(s) from the post-approval 
stability protocol within the approved shelf life
2
4-5
IA
6. replacement   of   the   sterility   testing by the 
container/closure system integrity testing
None
1-2,4-5
IB
3
4-5
IA
Conditions
1. The addition of test(s) is not due to stability concerns or to the identification of new impurities.
2. The approved final product shelf life is at least 24 months.
3. The method used to demonstrate the container/closure system integrity has already been approved as part 
of a previous application.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 85
Supporting Data
1. Copies or summaries of analytical procedures, if new analytical procedures are used.
2. Copies or summaries of validation reports, if new analytical procedures are used.
3. Proposed storage conditions and or shelf life, as appropriate.
4. Updated, post-approval stability protocol (and stability commitment).
5. Justification of the change to the post-approval stability protocol or stability commitment.
6. If applicable, stability testing results to support the change to the post-approval stability protocol or stability 
commitment (e.g., data to show greater reliability of the alternate test).
Description of Change
Conditions to 
be fulfilled
Supporting 
data
Amendment type
(Q) B.II.h.1. Update to the ‘Adventitious Agents Safety Evaluation’ information (section 3.2.A.2)
a)
Studies related to manufacturing steps 
investigated for the first time for one or more 
d
titi
t
None
II
b) Replacement of obsolete studies related to manufacturing steps and adventitious agents already reported in 
the dossier:
1)
with modification of risk assessment
None
II
2)
without modification of risk assessment
None
1,2,3
IB
Supporting Data
1.
Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossiers including the introduction of the new studies to 
investigate the capability of manufacturing steps to inactivate/reduce adventitious agents.
2.
Justification that the studies do not modify the risk assessment.
3.
Amendment of product information (where applicable).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 86
(Q) B.III CEP/TSE/MONOGRAPHS
(Q) B.III.1 Submission of a new or updated Ph. Eur.
certificate of suitability or deletion of Ph. Eur. certificate of
suitability:
Conditions to 
be
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a) European Pharmacopoeial Certificate of Suitability to the
relevant Ph. Eur. Monograph.
1.
new
certificate   from   an    already    
approved manufacturer
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
8, 11
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 IAIN
2.
updated certificate from an already approved 
manufacturer
1, 2, 3, 4, 8
1, 2, 3, 4, 5
IA
3.
new certificate from a new manufacturer 
(replacement or addition)
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
8, 11
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 IAIN
4.
deletion
of
certificates
(in
case
multiple certificates exist per material)
10
3
IA
5.
new certificate for a non-sterile active substance 
that is to be used in a sterile medicinal product, 
where water is used in the last steps of the 
synthesis and the material is not claimed to be 
endotoxin free
None
1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6
IB
b) European Pharmacopoeial TSE Certificate of suitability 
for an active substance/starting material/ 
reagent/intermediate/or excipient
1.
new certificate for an active substance from a 
new or an already approved manufacturer
3, 5, 6, 11
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 IAIN
2.
new certificate for a starting 
material/reagent/intermediate/or excipient 
from a new or an already approved manufacturer
3, 6, 9
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 IA
3.
updated certificate from an already approved 
manufacturer
7, 9
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 IA
4.
deletion
of
certificates
(in
case
multiple certificates exist per material)
10
3
IA
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 87
Conditions:
1.
The finished product release and end of shelf life specifications remain the same.
2.
Unchanged (excluding tightening) additional (to Ph. Eur.) specifications for impurities (excluding residual
solvents, provided they are in compliance with ICH/VICH) and product specific requirements (e.g.,
particle size profiles, polymorphic form), if applicable.
3.
The manufacturing process of the active substance, starting material/reagent/intermediate does not
include the use of materials of human or animal origin for which an assessment of viral safety data is
required.
4.
For active substances only, it will be tested immediately prior to use if no retest period is included in the
Ph. Eur. Certificate of Suitability or if data to support a retest period is not already provided in the dossier.
5.
The active substance/starting material/reagent/intermediate/excipient is not sterile.
6.
The substance is not included in a veterinary medicinal product for use in animal species susceptible to
TSE
7.
For veterinary medicinal products: there has been no change in the source of material.
8.
For herbal active substances: the manufacturing route, physical form, extraction solvent and drug extract
ratio (DER) should remain the same.
9.
If Gelatine manufactured from bones is to be used in a medicinal product for parenteral use, it should
only be manufactured in compliance with the relevant country’s requirements.
10. At least one manufacturer for the same substance remains in the dossier.
11. If the active substance is a not a sterile substance but is to be used in a sterile medicinal product then
according to the CEP, it must not use water during the last steps of the synthesis or if it does the active
substance must also be claimed to be free from bacterial endotoxins.
Supporting Data:
1.
Copy of the current (updated) Ph. Eur. Certificate of Suitability.
2.
In the case of an addition of a manufacturing site, the variation application form should clearly outline the
‘present’ and ‘proposed’ manufacturers as listed in section 2.5 of the application form.
3.
Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossier (presented in the EU-CTD format).
Where applicable, a document providing information of any materials falling within the scope of the 
Note for Guidance on Minimising the Risk of Transmitting Animal Spongiform Encephalopathy Agents 
via Human and Veterinary Medicinal Products, including those which are used in the manufacture of 
the active substance/excipient. The following information should be included for each  such  material:  
Name  of  manufacturer,  species  and  tissues  from  which  the  material  is  a derivative, country of 
origin of the source animals and its use. For the centralized Procedure, this information should be 
included in an updated TSE table A (and B, if relevant).
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 88
4.
Where applicable, for active substance, a declaration by the Qualified Person (QP) of each of the
manufacturing authorisation holders listed in the application where the active substance is used as a
starting material and a declaration by the QP of each of the manufacturing authorisation holders listed
in the application as responsible for batch release. These declarations should state that the active
substance manufacturer(s) referred to in the application operates in compliance with the detailed
guidelines on good manufacturing practice for starting materials. A single declaration may be acceptable
under certain circumstances — see the note under variation No B.II.b.1. The manufacture of
intermediates also requires a QP declaration, while as far as any updates to certificates for active
substances and intermediates are concerned, a QP declaration is only required if, compared to the
previously registered version of the certificate, there is a change to the actual listed manufacturingsites.
5.
Suitable evidence to confirm compliance of the water used in the final steps of the synthesis of the active
substance with the corresponding requirements on quality of water for pharmaceutical use.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 89
B.III.2 Change to comply with Ph. Eur. or with a 
pharmacopoeia recognised by SAHPRA
Conditions 
to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a)
Change
of
specification(s)
of
a
former
non-EU
Pharmacopoeial substance to fully comply with the Ph. Eur
or any Pharmacopoeia recognised by SAHPRA
1. active biological substance
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4
IAIN
2.    excipients/Active biological substance starting 
materials
1, 2, 4
1, 2, 3, 4
IA
b) Change to comply with an update of the relevant
monograph of the Ph. Eur. or Pharmacopoeia recognised
by SAHPRA
1, 2, 4, 5,
1, 2, 3, 4
IA
c)
Change in specifications from a national 
pharmacopoeia of a Member State to the Ph. Eur.
1,4,5
1,2,3,4
IA
Conditions
1.
The change is made exclusively to fully comply with the pharmacopoeia. All the tests in the specification need
to correspond to the pharmacopoeial standard after the change, except any additional supplementary tests.
2.
Additional specifications to the pharmacopoeia for product specific properties are unchanged (e.g., particle
size profiles, polymorphic form or, e.g. bioassays, aggregates).
3.
No significant changes in qualitative and quantitative impurities profile unless the specifications are tightened
4.
Additional validation of a new or changed pharmacopoeial method is not required.
5.
For herbal active substances: the manufacturing route, physical form, extraction solvent and drug extract.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  90
 
Supporting data
1. Amendment of the relevant section(s) of the dossier (presented in the ZA-CTD format.
2. Comparative table of current and proposed specifications.
3. Batch analysis data (in a comparative tabulated format) on two production batches of the relevant substance for
all tests in the new specification and additionally, where appropriate, comparative dissolution profile data for the
finishedproductonatleastonepilotbatch.Forherbal medicinalproducts, comparative disintegration data may be
acceptable.
4. Data to demonstrate the suitability of the monograph to control the substance, e.g., a comparison of the 
potential impurities with the transparency note of the monograph.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  91
13.
APPENDIX 4: (Q) D. PLASMA MASTER FILE (PMF) / VACCINE ANTIGEN 
MASTER FILE (VAMF)
(Q) D.1 change in the name and/or address of the VAMF 
certificate holder
Conditions to 
be Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment 
Type
1
1
IAIN
Conditions
1.
The VAMF certificate holder must remain the same legal entity.
Supporting Data
1.
A formal document from a relevant official body in which the new name or new address is mentioned.
(Q) D.2 change in the name and/or address of the PMF 
certificate holder
1
1
IAIN
Conditions
1.
The PMF certificate holder must remain the same legal entity.
Supporting Data:
1.
A formal document from a relevant official body in which the new name or new address is mentioned.
(Q) D.3 change or transfer of the current PMF certificate
holder to a new PMF certificate holder, i.e. different legal
entity
1-6
IAIN
Supporting Data
1.
A document including the identification (name and address) of the current PMF Holder (transferor) and
the identification (name and address) of the person to whom the transfer is to be granted (transferee)
together with the proposed implementation date — signed by both companies.
2.
Copy of the latest PMF Certificate page ‘EMA Plasma Master File (PMF) Certificate of compliance with
Community legislation’.
3.
Proof of establishment of the new holder (Excerpt of the commercial register and the English 
translation of it)
— signed by both companies.
4.
Confirmation of the transfer of the complete PMF documentation since the initial PMF certification to
the transferee — signed by both companies.
5.
Letter of Authorisation including contact details of the person responsible for communication between
the competent authority and the PMF holder — signed by the transferee.
6.
Letter of Undertaking to fulfil all open and remaining commitments (if any) -signed by the transferee.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  92
(Q) D.4 change in the name and/or address of a blood 
establishment including blood/plasma collection centers
1-2
1-3
IA
Conditions
1. The blood establishment must remain the same legal entity.
2. The change must be administrative (e.g. merger, takeover); change in the name of the blood 
establishment/ collection center provided the blood establishment must remain the same.
Supporting Data
1.
Signed declaration that the change does not involve a change of the quality system within the blood 
establishment.
2.
Signed declaration that there is no change in the list of the collection centers.
3.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.5 replacement or addition of a blood/plasma collection
center within a blood establishment already included in the
PMF
1-3
IB
Supporting Data
1.
Epidemiological data for viral markers related to the blood/plasma collection center covering the last three
(3) years. For newly-opened center(s) or in case no data is yet available, a declaration that epidemiological
data will be provided at the time of the next annual update(s).
2.
Statement that the center is working under the same conditions as the other centers belonging to the
blood establishment, as specified in the standard contract between blood establishment and PMF holder.
3.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.6 Deletion or change of status 
(operational/nonoperational) of 
establishment(s)/centre(s) used for blood/ plasma 
collection or in the testing of donations and plasma
1-2
1
IA
Conditions
1.
The reason for deletion or changes of status should not be related to a GMP issue.
2.
The establishments(s)/center(s) should comply with the legislation in terms of inspections in case of change 
of status from non-operational to operational.
Supporting data
1. Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.7 addition of a new blood establishment for the 
collection of blood/plasma not included in the PMF
2
II
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  93
(Q) D.8 replacement or addition of a blood center for testing
of donations and/or plasma pools within an establishment
already included in the PMF
1-2
IB
Supporting data
1.
Statement that the testing is performed following the same SOPs and/or test methods as already accepted.
2.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.9 addition of a new blood establishment for testing of
donations and/or plasma pool not included in the PMF
2
II
(Q)
D.10
replacement
or
addition
of
a
new
blood
establishment or center(s) in which storage of plasma is
carried out
1-2
IB
Supporting data:
1.
Statement that the storage center is working following the same SOPs as the already accepted 
establishment.
2.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.11 deletion of a blood establishment or center(s) in 
which storage of plasma is carried out
1
1
IA
Conditions
1. The reason for deletion should not be related to GMP issues.
Supporting data
1. Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  94
(Q) D.12 replacement or addition of an organisation involved
in the transport of plasma
1
IB
Supporting data
1.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier, including a list of all the blood
establishments using this transport organisation, a summary of the system in place to ensure that the
transport is performed under appropriate conditions (time, temperature and GMP compliance) and
confirmation that transport conditions are validated.
(Q) D.13 Deletion of an organisation involved in the 
transport of plasma
1
1
IA
Conditions
1.
The reason for deletion should not be related to GMP issues.
Supporting data
1.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.14 addition of a CE-marked test kit to test individual
donations as a new test kit or as a replacement of an existing
test kit
1
1-2
IA
Conditions
1.
The new test kit is CE-marked.
Supporting data
1.
List of testing site(s) where the kit is used.
2.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier, including updated information on 
testing as requested in the ‘Guideline on the scientific data requirements for a PMF’.
(Q) D.15 addition of a non-CE marked test kit to test 
individual donations as a new test kit or as a 
replacement of an existing test kit
Conditions 
to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a)
The new test kit has not previously been approved 
in the PMF for any blood center for testing of 
donations
II
b)
The new test kit has been approved in the PMF for 
other blood center(s) for testing of donations
1-2
IA
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  95
Supporting data
1.
List of testing center(s) where the kit is currently used and a list of testing center(s) where the kit will be used.
2.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier, including updated information on testing as 
requested in the ‘Guideline on the scientific data requirements for a PMF’.
(Q) D.16 change of kit/method used to test pools (antibody 
or antigen or NAT test).
II
(Q) D.17 introduction or extension of inventory hold 
procedure.
1
1
IA
Condition
1.
The inventory holding procedure is a more stringent procedure (e.g., release only after retesting 
of donors).
Supporting data
1.
Updated relevant sections of the PMF dossier, including the rationale for introduction or extension of 
inventory hold period, the sites where the inventory hold takes place and for changes to procedure, a 
decision tree including new conditions.
(Q) D.18 Removal of inventory hold period or reduction in 
its length.
1
IB
Supporting data
1. Updated relevant sections of the PMF dossier
(Q) D.19 Replacement or addition of blood containers (e.g.
bags, bottles)
Conditions 
to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a)
the new blood containers are CE-marked
1-2
1
IA
b)
the new blood containers are not CE-marked
II
Conditions
1. The container is CE-marked.
2. The quality criteria of the blood in the container remain unchanged.
Supporting data
1.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier, including the name of container, 
manufacturer, anticoagulant solution specification, confirmation of CE-mark and the name of the blood 
establishments where the container is used.
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  96
(Q) D.20 change in storage/transport
Conditions 
to be 
Fulfilled
Supporting 
Data
Amendment Type
a)
storage and/or transport conditions
1
1
IA
b)
maximum storage time for the plasma
1-2
1
IA
Conditions
1.
The change should tighten the conditions and be in compliance with Ph. Eur. requirements for Human 
Plasma fractionation.
2.
The maximum storage time is shorter than previously.
Supporting data
1.
Updated relevant sections and annexes of the PMF dossier, including detailed description of the new 
conditions, confirmation of validation of storage/transport conditions and the name of the blood 
establishment(s) where the change takes place (if relevant).
(Q) D.21 Introduction of test for viral markers when this
introduction will have significant impact on the viral risk
assessment.
1
II
(Q) D.22 change in the plasma pool preparation (e.g.,
manufacturing method, pool size, storage of plasma pool
samples)
1
IB
Supporting data
1. Updated relevant sections of the PMF dossier.
(Q) D.23 changes in the steps that would be taken if it is 
found retrospectively that donation(s) should have been 
excluded from processing (‘look-back’ procedure)
1
II
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  97
14. APPENDIX 5: FORMAT OF COVER PAGE
The following templates must be included as part of the submission of a variation application to 
SAHPRA:
5.1 Letter of application – M1.0
5.2 Tabulated Schedule of Amendments – M1.5.2.1
5.3 Medicine Register Details – M1.5.2.2 5.4 Affidavit 
by the HCR / Applicant – M1.5.2.3
5.1 Letter of application
Instructions for applicants in gray (delete once read): Copy and paste the text in this document into your official 
company letterhead. Fill in all relevant information in the letter template, indicated by { }. Delete
{  } once information has been filled in.
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
SOUTH AFRICAN HEALTH PRODUCTS REGULATORY AUTHORITY BUILDING A
413 KIRKNESS STREET 
LOFTUS PARK ARCARDIA
PRETORIA
Letter Date
Dear Madam,
APPLICATION FOR A VARIATION/AMENDMENT TO A REGISTERED PRODUCT
Registration Number(s)
Product Proprietary name(s)
API(s)
Dosage strength (and Dosage form)
{Working code e.g. eCTD- ANA/eSubmission
ANA/, (All V
Codes}
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  98
Type of submission
<Type
IA><Type
IB><Type
II><Response
to
recommendations> This refers to the overall submission,
which is classified according to the most extensive
procedure (e.g., if a Type IB and Type II are submitted
together, the overall submission will be treated as a Type II,
payment of each application type will apply.)
Sequence number
Description of the submission
{Brief product description}
Format of the submission
We confirm that the CD/DVD burning session is closed and the submission is checked with an up-to- date and
state-of-the-art anti-virus software: {Name of the antivirus software and version of the checker} and is virus-
free.
Number of CDs/DVDs submitted: {number} 
Application format: <eCTD><eSubmission>
If eCTD, state the name of the eCTD validation tool used to check compliance
If eSubmission, state briefly (2 lines max) why eSubmission was used instead of the SAHPRA preferred eCTD format
Summary of the variations / amendments applied for
Applicants are to list and describe all of the variations applied for, in order to aid SAHPRA with routing the
application appropriately. The table is intended to be a relatively high-level summary, with more information
on the exact nature of the variations provided in the amendment schedule.
Variations/changes included in this application
Code
Procedure
Code description
Summary
E.g.,
(Q) C.I.2a
Type IB
Change(s)
in
the
PI
or
PIL
of
a
generic/biosimilar
medicine
following
assessment of the same change for the
reference product
Special
warnings
and
precautions
updated to reflect content of published
local innovator PI [product name X,
published 2018/05/21]
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page  99
E.g.,
(Q) C.I.6a
Type II
Addition of a new therapeutic
indication or modification of an
approved one
Application for an additional indication
for Myelofibrosis, supported by new
clinical trial data. Indication has been
approved by the EMA and FDA.
5.2 Tabulated schedule of amendments
TheMRF1PART1Ac)/Module1.2.1f)Amendmenthistoryreflectstheparticularsofthepreviouspharmaceutical
amendments (if applicable). Include this history here for amendments previously in the MRF1 format.
Note: Landscape format is recommended for this table. A column headed “Effect of amendment” is only
applicabletoModule3.2.P.1andshouldNOTbeincludedforthewholetable.Furthermore,thetableisapplicable
to both SAHPRA’s ME&R and Clinical directorates. Only those variations / amendments listed in the table below
may be reflected in the dossier.
The amended PARTs/Annexures/Modules are as follows:
Annexures
/ PARTs / Modules
Comparison between Annexures / 
PARTs / Modules
Reason
for 
amendment
Reviewer’s 
comment
Existing
Amended
Example 1 is not acceptable – it will take longer to evaluate as the changes have not been identified
for easy reference.
The format of example 2 is recommended as evaluation is facilitated by the identification of the 
specific items.
Example
10 (b)
1
Stability 
report: XXX
Stability report YYY
replaces
report XXX
Includes stability 
data on 2 batches
stored for 36 
months
Example
10 (b)
2
Pages 10.0,
10.1, 10.3.1
Stability data on 
two production
batches stored for
24  months  at  25
ºC/60 % RH
and
for
3
months
a
Pages 10.0,
10.2.1,10.2.2,
10.3.1, 10.3.2
Stability data on 
the same two 
production 
batches stored 
for 36 months at 
25
ºC/60  % RH
included
Extension of the
shelf life to 36
months
applied
for.
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v5
Page 100
No index in 10 
(b), 
attacheddata
only 
referred to.
Detailed index 
included in 10 (b)
Administrative 
update to 
facilitate review.
10 (c)
Shelf-life of 24 
months 
approved.
A discussion of the
results is included 
and 36 months‟ 
shelf- life is 
inferred.
Extension of the 
shelf- life to 36 
months applied 
for.
Note: Stability specification limits should be reflected in the stability report. Out-of-specification results should be 
addressed.
Contact for validation errors:
Should there be validation errors, please contact: 
Name and Surname}
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 101
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
{Designation}
{Email address}
{Contact number}
I declare that:
•
the amendments are in line with the relevant, current guidelines and/or a 
motivation for any deviation has been submitted
•
no amendments other than those stated in the list of changes/amendments 
have been made Yours faithfully,
{Name}
{Designation and contact 
details} Signed:
5.3 Medicine Register Details
The following information should be included in Module 
1.5.2.2.
Product to which this application refers
Proprietary name of medicine
Registration/Reference number
Registered medicine (R) / 
Old Medicine (OM)
Details (if there is no change to the “Current”, indicate as such under “Proposed”, do not state N/A)
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 102
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 103
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
FPRC
Name and Address
SAHPRA License No.
SMF Reference No.
FPRR
Name and Address
SAHPRA License No.
SMF Reference No.
Formulation
If the formulation is the same, confirmation to this effect will suffice.
5.4 Affidavit by the HCR / Applicant
The following affidavit should be included in Module 1.5.2.3. The affidavit should be on company
letterhead and include only those statements relevant to the application. In the case of a Transfer
of the Certificate of Registration (To HCR), this must be done by the proposed HCR.
AFFIDAVIT BY THE HCR / APPLICANT
PRODUCT NAME: { }
REGISTRATION NUMBER: { }
I, {insert full name and surname} Responsible Pharmacist [as defined in Section 22C (1)(b) of Act 101 of 1965] of 
{insert Company name} confirm that:
a)
I am in possession of the master documentation pertaining to the above-mentioned
medicine.
b)
This master documentation is the same as that which was in existence when the medicine
was initially registered or which has been updated in accordance with amendmentsofthe
medicine registration form (MRF1/CTD) in accordance with the provisions of the
regulations under the Medicines and Related Substances Control Act, 1965 (Act 101of
1965).
c)
The master documentation conforms with the Registration dossier;
d)
The master documentation is properly authorized (i.e. signed and dated by at least the
responsible pharmacist), and the quality assurance or production manager as applicable;
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 104
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
e)
The master documentation has been supplied to the new manufacturer/packer or
laboratory {state company and role} and that applicable control records have been
compiled. I confirm further that I have signed these to indicate my approval that they
contain all the requirements listed in the relevant master documents; namely
•
formulation and method of manufacture and packaging in-process control
procedures
•
specifications pharmaceutical ingredients specifications for the final product
specifications for the packaging material specifications for the label
•
specifications for the package insert
•
testing procedures for the pharmaceutical ingredients testing procedures for
the final product
•
testing procedures for the packaging materials.
f)
I confirm that a technical agreement and/or signed contract(s) exist(s) with all third party
manufacturer(s)/packer(s)/laboratory(ies) involved in manufacturing of this product.
g)
For an alternative/additional manufacturer:
•
I confirm that the manufacturing procedure (including equipment) is identical
to the manufacturing procedure currently used or
•
I confirm that the manufacturing procedure (including equipment) differs, but
falls within the <Type IA><Type IAIN>< and><Type IB> amendment
•
I confirm that the manufacturing procedure (or equipment) is different from
the manufacturing procedure (or equipment) currently on file outside of the
<Type IA><Type IAIN>< and><Type IB> amendments and that comparative data
(efficacy), stability data or protocol (as applicable), and a validation protocol for
the first three production batches, are submitted.
h)
<I confirm that the PI will be updated to reflect the new HCR details and will submit the
amended PI with the first update of the dossier after authorisation of this amendment.
(for ToHCRs only)>
i)
<IconfirmthattheRegistrationdossierwillbefullyupdatedtothecurrentstatutory format
and current scientific standards within 12 months of transfer of the certificate of
registration, or approval of additional, or change of manufacturer.>
OR
<IconfirmthattheRegistrationdossierwillbefullyupdatedtothecurrentstatutory format
and current scientific standards by (stipulate date) in accordance with the programme as
approved by the Inspectorate.>
Signed on {DD/MM/YYYY}:
Guideline for Biological Medicines Amendment
May 2025
Page 105
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-05_v6
15. VALIDITY
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces
[2.61_Biological_Medicines_Amendment_Guideline_V4]. It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when
required
