SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Page 1 of 29
1 2 
 N o v e m b e r 
 2 0 2 5 
B I O S I M I L A R 
 M E D I C I N E 
 Q U A L I T Y , 
 N O N - C L I N I C A L 
 A N D 
 C L I N I C A L 
 
R E Q U I R E M E N T S 
 
This guideline document is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for the registration
of biosimilar medicines. It represents the South African Health Product Regulatory Authority’s (SAHPRA) current thinking on the
safety, quality, and efficacy of medicines. It is not intended as an exclusive approach. SAHPRA reserves the right to request any
additional information to establish the safety, quality, and efficacy of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time
of evaluation. Alternative approaches may be used but these should be scientifically and technically justified. SAHPRA is committed
to ensure that all registered medicines will be of the required quality, safety, and efficacy. It is important that applicants adhere to
all the administrative requirements to avoid delays in the processing and evaluation of applications. Guidelines and application
forms are available from the Office of the Chief Executive Officer and on the SAHPRA website.
Document History
Final
Version
Reason for Amendment
Effective Date
1
Version 1: First publication released for comment
January 2010
Published for comment
April 2010
Deadline for comment
15 July 2010
2
Finalised version for Implementation
March 2012
3
Published for comment
November 2013
Deadline for comment (extended to 31 March 2014)
31 January 2014
4
Finalised version for Implementation
August 2014
5
Template update and changes to interchangeability statement
January 2025
Published for comment
July 2025
Finalised version for Implementation
November 2025
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Page 2 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
Contents
Document History..................................................................................................................................... 1
Glossary....................................................................................................................................................6
2.
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................................. 9
2.1 Purpose........................................................................................................................................... 10
2.2 Scope...............................................................................................................................................10
3.
LEGAL PROVISION............................................................................................................................10
4.
QUALITY, NON-CLINICAL AND CLINICAL DATA..................................................................................11
4.1. QUALITY AND NON-CLINICAL DATA.................................................................................................. 11
4.1.1. Pharmaceutical Quality..................................................................................................................12
4.1.2.
In vitro biological studies........................................................................................................ 13
4.1.3.
Non-clinical (animal) studies...................................................................................................14
4.2. CLINICAL DATA................................................................................................................................ 15
5.
REFERENCES.................................................................................................................................... 23
6.
VALIDITY..........................................................................................................................................24
ANNEXURE 1: Product Class Specific for Monoclonal Antibodies............................................................. 25
10
REFERENCES.................................................................................................................................... 32
Page 3 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
Glossary
Some of the definitions below were modified (compared to those provided in other documents) to
reflect the meanings as used in this guidance.
Abbreviation/ 
Terms
Meaning
CTD
Common Technical Document
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EMA
European Medicines Agency
SAHPRA
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice - as defined in the current version of the Guideline to 
Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicines
Equivalence trial
An equivalence clinical trial is conducted to demonstrate that there is no clinically 
significant difference between a standard and an experimental treatment. The specified
differences between the efficacies of the two treatments are shown to be no more 
than some pre-specified margin 7.11.
Immunogenicity
The ability of a substance to trigger an immune response or reaction (e.g. development 
of specific antibodies, T cell response, allergic or anaphylactic reaction) following 
administration to an animal or human.
Non-inferiority 
trial
Not inferior to a comparator in the parameter studied. A non-inferiority clinical trial is 
one which has the primary objective of showing that the response to the investigational
product is not clinically inferior to a comparator by a pre-specified margin 7.11.
Originator 
medicine 
This is the innovator product - a medicine which has been licensed by a National 
Regulatory Authority which SAHPRA aligns itself with on the basis of a full registration 
dossier, i.e. the approved indication(s) for use were granted on the basis of full quality, 
efficacy and safety data.
PD
Pharmacodynamic – the biochemical and physiological effects of drugs on the body and
the mechanisms of drug action and the relationship between drug concentration and 
effect.
PK
Pharmacokinetic – the study of the mechanisms of absorption and distribution of an 
administered drug, the rate at which a drug action begins and the duration of the 
Page 4 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
effect, the chemical changes of the substance in the body and the effects and routes of 
excretion of the metabolites of the drug.
Biological 
Medicine
These are medicines that contain a living organism or are derived from a living
organism or biological processes. They include, but are not limited to the
following: 

Plasma-derived
and
animal
products
-
e.g.,
clotting
factors,
immunosera, antivenoms; 

 Vaccines;

Biotechnology-derived medicines (recombinant DNA products) - e.g.
rHu-anti-haemophilic
factors,
hormones,
cytokines,
enzymes,
monoclonal antibodies, erythropoietins, and nucleic acids;

 Products developed for human gene therapy.
Well-characterised, low-molecular mass, medicinal biological compounds, may
be excluded by specific regulatory decision from the biological medicine status,
and in that case, will not be reviewed through the biological medicines review
process.
Biosimilar or 
Biosimilar 
medicine 
This is synonymous with follow-on biologics and similar biotherapeutic
products (SBP). A biosimilar application is for a biological medicine that is
similar, but not necessarily identical, in terms of quality, safety and efficacy to
an already registered reference biological medicine.
Reference 
substance
The active ingredient from the reference medicine that will be used in
comparisons of physico-chemical characterisation, and other properties, of the
biosimilar.
Reference 
medicine 
The comparator for head-to-head comparability studies with the biosimilar
product to show similarity in terms of quality, safety and efficacy. It is the
originator medicine (innovator product).
Only an innovator product that was registered by SAHPRA in South Africa on
the basis of safety, efficacy and quality can serve as a reference medicine.
The reference product that is registered in South Africa must be sourced from
a country that SAHPRA aligns itself with.
Page 5 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
It
does
not
refer
to
measurement
standards
such
as
international,
pharmacopeial, or national standards or reference standards.
Similar
This is the absence of a relevant (or significant) difference in the parameter of
interest.
Substitution
Practice of replacing one product for another at the pharmacy-level without
seeking the approval of the prescriber
Interchangeable
medicine 
Means medicines that contain the same active substances which are identical
in strength or concentration, dosage form and route of administration and
meet the same or comparable standards, which comply with the requirements
for therapeutic equivalence as prescribed;
Page 6 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
1.
PREAMBLE
Biological medicines that are manufactured to be similar to registered originator medicines (unlike generic
pharmaceutical medicines, which are identical) are known as Biosimilar.
The SAHPRA practices for the registration of multisource “generic” pharmaceutical medicines do not apply to
biological medicines. This guideline document outlines the specific information required for the registration of
biosimilar medicines. These types of biological medicines are similar to a reference product already registered
in South Africa.
2.
INTRODUCTION
It is the policy of SAHPRA that all medicines containing or derived from living materials, including biosimilar 
medicines, are regarded as Biological Medicines and that applications for registration will require primary 
evaluation by the Biological Medicines Committee, in addition to other committees of SAHPRA. This guideline
is aligned with that of EMA ICH Biotechnological/biological products subject to changes in their 
manufacturing process: comparability of biotechnological/biological products – Scientific guideline and 
should be read in conjunction with the EMA guidelines listed under section 5.
If the new product is claimed to be similar in terms of quality, safety and efficacy to a reference medicine that
has been registered in South Africa, the applicant may submit an application for the registration of a biosimilar
medicine according to this guideline document.
The information requirements for a biosimilar application primarily include defined requirements for
physico-chemical and biological comparability and reduced non-clinical and clinical evidence for safety and
efficacy as outlined in this guideline document.
The original registered reference medicine is manufactured and controlled according to non-public proprietary
methods that are not available to a “follow-on” developer; therefore, it is necessary that the applicant for a
biosimilar medicine (that may use alternative production technologies) provide evidence that the biosimilar is
indeed similar in quality, safety and efficacy to the registered medicine used as a reference product.
If similarity cannot be demonstrated, the products cannot be considered to be biosimilar, and a full clinical
submission application is required.
An appropriate comparability exercise is required to demonstrate that the biosimilar and the reference
medicinal products have similar profiles in terms of physico-chemical properties, quality, safety, and efficacy.
Page 7 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
This guideline document outlines the quality, non-clinical and clinical requirements for biosimilar medicines.
The quality section addresses the physico-chemical structural and functional requirements. The non-clinical
section addresses the pharmaco-toxicological assessments. The clinical section addresses the requirements
for pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, safety and efficacy studies as well as pharmaco-toxicological
assessments with special emphasis on studying the immunogenicity of biosimilar medicines. The section on
pharmacovigilance addresses the in-use safety of the medicine as well as the risk management plan.
Product class-specific annexes will supplement this guideline document where a need is identified.
2.1 Purpose
This guideline document is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications
for the registration of biosimilar medicines. It represents SAHPRA's current thinking on the safety, quality, and
efficacy of medicines. It is not intended as an exclusive approach.
2.2 Scope
This guideline document is applicable to biological medicines containing well-characterised
recombinant DNA-derived therapeutic proteins that can be shown to be similar to a biological
medicine registered in South Africa. Vaccines, even if manufactured by recombinant DNA technology
are excluded from the scope of this document (whereas requirements for monoclonal antibodies are
outlined in Annexure 1).
This guideline document also does not address the comparability exercise required for changes
introduced in the manufacturing process of a registered product; that is, changes during
development and post-registration. These issues are covered in the current SAHPRA Amendments
guideline.
An application for a biosimilar medicine that uses as reference a registered medicine classified as a
pharmaceutical by SAHPRA is not exempt from this guideline document and should be submitted as
described herein. SAHPRA may decide to waive some, or all the requirements based on the
circumstances and nature of the product comparability exercise.
This guideline document should be read in conjunction with all relevant current guidelines pertaining
to medicinal products. See website www.sahpra.org.za
Page 8 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
3.
LEGAL PROVISION
Medicines and Related Substances Act, 101 of 1965, as amended and the relevant Regulations.
4.
QUALITY, NON-CLINICAL AND CLINICAL DATA
4.1. QUALITY AND NON-CLINICAL DATA
The objective is to establish the chemical and molecular nature of the biosimilar active pharmaceutical
ingredient (API) and drug product, and to show that it has no relevant differences in physico-chemical
characteristics when compared to the API in a drug product of the reference medicine.
The relevance of observed differences in the physico-chemical characteristics must be explored using
appropriate functional bio-assays, and animal and clinical studies.
Validated analytical techniques that show the comparable functionality of the biosimilar and the reference
medicine in appropriate in vivo and in vitro systems should be used. The functions that are selected for analysis
should be shown to relate to the biological activity of the molecule. All functions should be compared to the
reference product activity and should be equivalent in those that are thought to be (major or minor)
mechanisms of action, and no new activity is demonstrated that is not evident in the reference product.
In vivo animal studies that show comparable toxicology and biological activity should be presented. Non-
clinical studies should be performed before initiating clinical development, and should be comparative in
nature, designed to detect differences in response between the biosimilar and the reference medicine, and
not just the response per se.
The design of an appropriate non-clinical study programme requires a clear understanding of the product
characteristics. Results from the physicochemical and biological characterisation studies should be reviewed
to assess the potential impact on efficacy and safety. A holistic approach is necessary to include all available
information in the development of the non-clinical and clinical studies leading to a successful application for
registration.
Ongoing consideration should be given to the use of emerging validated technologies.
The approach taken to establish the chemical and molecular nature of the biosimilar API, and to show that it
has no detectable, relevant differences in physico-chemical characteristics, when compared to the API in the
reference product, must be fully justified in the CTD non-clinical overview and/or the Quality Overall Summary.
Page 9 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
Comparisons based on publications or pharmacopeial monographs are not sufficient to establish similarities.
4.1.1. Pharmaceutical Quality
The application for registration of a biosimilar shall provide a full quality dossier detailing the source materials
and inactive pharmaceutical ingredients (IPIs), manufacture, stability and control of the process in accordance
with SAHPRA guidelines and compliant with the Guideline for Good Manufacturing Practice and other relevant
guidelines 5.4,5.5,5.6,5.7
The basic requirement for a biosimilar is that it is demonstrated to be “similar” to the reference product. A
lack of detectable, relevant differences between the biosimilar and the reference medicine is the basis for
reducing non-clinical and clinical requirements for registration.
The applicant should carry out a comprehensive physicochemical and biological characterisation of the
biosimilar API substance; each of these analyses must be conducted in a head-to-head comparison with the
reference API substance.
Molecular characterisation should be as extensive as possible within the limits of current technology – these
studies should, where possible be conducted in head-to-head comparison with the reference product. Primary,
secondary, and tertiary structures should be demonstrated as well as the composition and structure of post-
translational modifications and additions – e.g. glycosylation. Techniques used should include a search for,
analysis and comparison of antigenic epitopes that could lead to adverse reactions.
Examples of tests that may be used for physico-chemical characterisation:
o
Amino-acid sequence analysis of the purified product
o
Peptide mapping
o
Quantification of the active principle by biological assays
o
Molecular size analysis
o
Characterisation of higher order structure/s
o
Identification of iso-forms
o
Identification of post-translation modifications
o
Quantification of truncated (extended) amino acid sequence impurities
OTHER FACTORS TO CONSIDER:
o
Chemical modification (e.g. oxidation, deamidation, methylation)
Page 10 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
o
Aggregate formation
o
Impurities (e.g. presence of host cell proteins)
o
Glycosylation pattern
o
Structural differences which may be relevant to immunogenicity or allergenicity
To evaluate similarity, all aspects of product quality and heterogeneity should be assessed. Differences may
be due to differences in source materials, process, impurities, or excipients, and should be assessed for their
relevance and potential impact on the clinical safety and efficacy of the biosimilar, and a justification (e.g.
own-study results or literature data) of the actions taken to assess the relevance of such differences must be
provided.
Differences in critical product quality attributes (i.e. those that are known to have a potential impact on clinical
activity will add to the clinical testing required for the product). For example, if differences are found in
glycosylation patterns that alter the biodistribution of the product and thereby change the dosing scheme,
additional clinical testing for the product would likely be required. Differences of unknown clinical relevance,
particularly regarding safety, may have to be addressed in additional pre- or post-marketing studies 5.8.
Other differences between the biosimilar and reference substance may be acceptable and would not trigger
the need for extra clinical evaluation. For example, a therapeutic protein that has lower levels of protein
aggregates could be thought to have a better safety profile than the reference and may not need added clinical
evaluation.
Due to the unavailability of the API of the reference, the biosimilar manufacturer will typically use the
commercially available reference medicine for the comparison, which will, by definition, be formulated with
inactive pharmaceutical ingredients (IPI). It should be verified that these IPIs do not interfere with analytical
methods and thereby impact the test results.
If the reference API needs to be purified from a formulated reference medicine in order to be suitable for
characterisation, studies must be carried out to demonstrate that product heterogeneity and relevant
attributes of the active moiety are not affected by the isolation process. The approach employed to isolate
and compare the biosimilar active substance to the reference active substance should be justified as
appropriate for the intended purpose. Where possible, the product should be tested with and without
manipulation.
A similar comparison of the biosimilar medicine (final product) characteristics with the reference medicine
should be undertaken.
Page 11 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
4.1.2. In vitro biological studies
In vitro biological studies should be performed before initiating clinical development and should be
comparative in nature, designed to detect differences in response between the biosimilar and the reference
medicine and not just the response per se.5.1
Bioassays that show the comparable functionality of the biosimilar and the reference medicine in appropriate
in vivo and in vitro systems should be used. The biological endpoints that are selected should be shown to
relate to the clinical activity of the molecule. Design of an appropriate non-clinical study programme requires
a clear understanding of product characteristics. Results from the physiochemical and biological
characterisation studies should be reviewed to assess the potential impact on biological activity, efficacy, and
safety.
Comparative receptor-binding studies or cell-based assays, many of which may already be available from
quality-related bioassays, should normally be undertaken in order to establish comparability in reactivity and
the likely causative factor(s) if comparability cannot be established.
4.1.3. Non-clinical (animal) studies
In vivo animal studies to show comparable toxicology and activity should be presented.
Animal studies should be designed to maximise the information obtained and to compare the biosimilar and
reference medicine intended to be used in clinical trials. Such studies should be designed to detect differences
in response between the biosimilar and reference medicine and should be conducted in a species known to be
relevant and sensitive using appropriately up-to-date, validated methods.
Where the model allows, consideration should be given to monitoring several endpoints such as:
a)
Pharmacodynamic effect/activity relevant to the clinical application. These data should usually be
available from biological assays in the pharmaceutical modules of the dossier.
b)
Non-clinical toxicity as determined in at least one repeat dose toxicity study, including toxicokinetic
measurements.
Toxicokinetic measurements should include but not be limited to analysis of immunogenicity:

Determination of relevant antibody titres
Page 12 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025

Where warranted due to biosimilar homology to endogenous proteins, analysis of anti-biosimilar
antibody cross-reactivity to endogenous proteins may be needed

Depending upon PK assay format and PD markers, the characterisation of neutralising antibodies
may be needed to interpret the study

It may be relevant to analyse other forms of immune response
The duration of the studies should be sufficiently long to allow the detection of significant differences in toxicity
and/or immune responses between the biosimilar and reference medicine.
If there are specific safety concerns, these might be addressed by including relevant observations (i.e. local
tolerance) in the same repeat dose toxicity study.
Normally, other routine toxicological studies such as safety pharmacology, reproduction toxicology,
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity studies are not required for biosimilar medicines, unless indicated from the
results of repeat dose studies or other information 5.9
Animal immunogenicity studies may be of value in demonstrating the similarity of immune responses to
reference and biosimilar products but cannot be an alternative to immunogenicity studies in humans.
4.2. CLINICAL DATA
The clinical comparability exercise is a stepwise procedure that should begin with pharmacokinetic (PK) and
pharmacodynamic (PD) studies followed by clinical efficacy and safety trial(s) or, in certain cases, PK/PD studies
may be sufficient for demonstrating clinical comparability 5.10
Clinical studies should have the following characteristics:

The biosimilar final product (formulation) is compared to a reference medicine that has been
registered in South Africa.

In general, an equivalence design should be used for clinical studies.

The efficacy of the biosimilar must be equivalent to the reference medicine7.12

There must be evidence for efficacy and safety for each indication.

A risk-benefit analysis of the biosimilar product should be similar to the reference medicine.
The requirements depend on the existing knowledge about the reference medicine and the claimed
therapeutic indication(s). Available product/disease-specific guidelines should be followed.
Page 13 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
It is acknowledged that the manufacturing process will be optimised during development and before
registration application. The required clinical data for the Phase 3 comparability study should be obtained with
the test product as produced with the final manufacturing process, formulation, and specifications; and
therefore, representing the quality profile of the intended commercial batches. Any deviation from this should
be justified and supported by adequate additional data.
For all clinical comparability trial designs, assay sensitivity must be ensured5.13. Evidence must be presented to
show that the end-point tests used have been validated and conducted by a competent and accredited
laboratory.
4.2.1. Pharmacokinetic (PK) studies
Comparative PK studies designed to demonstrate clinical comparability of key PK parameters between the
biosimilar and the reference medicine are an essential part of demonstrating similarity.
Specific considerations related to the inherent characteristics of proteins described in the EMA Guideline on
clinical investigation of the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic proteins 5.10 should be taken into account.
The design of comparative PK studies should not necessarily mimic that of the accepted “clinical comparability”
design5.10, and differences in elimination characteristics between products, e.g. clearance and elimination half-
life, should also be explored.
The choice of the design for single-dose studies, steady-state studies, or repeated determination of PK
parameters should be justified by the applicant. The crossover design is usually not appropriate for therapeutic
proteins with a long half-life, e.g. therapeutic antibodies and pegylated proteins, or for proteins for which the
formation of specific antibodies is likely; parallel group designs should be considered.
The acceptance range to conclude clinical comparability with respect to any pharmacokinetic parameter
should be based on an assessment of clinical data, considering all available efficacy and safety information on
the biosimilar and reference medicine.
The accepted criteria used to assess clinical comparability studies initially developed for chemically derived,
orally administered products are not always sufficient for biological medicines and the clinical comparability
limits should be defined and justified prior to conducting the study.
4.2.2. Pharmacodynamic (PD) studies
Page 14 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
The pharmacodynamic (PD) markers should be selected on the basis of their relevance to demonstrate the 
therapeutic efficacy of the product. The pharmacodynamic effect of the biosimilar and the reference 
medicine should be compared in a population where the possible differences can best be observed.
The design and duration of the studies must be justified. Combined PK/PD studies may provide useful 
information on the relationship between exposure and effect.
The selected dose should be in the steep part of the dose-response curve. The most appropriate dose level 
needs to be chosen.
4.2.3. Confirmatory pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) studies
For biosimilar medicines, it is usual that comparative clinical trials of efficacy are required for the
demonstration of clinical comparability. In certain cases, however, comparative PK/PD studies between the
biosimilar and the reference medicine may be sufficient to demonstrate clinical comparability, provided that
all the following conditions are met:
a)
The PK of the reference medicinal product is well characterised.
b)
There is sufficient knowledge of the pharmacodynamic properties of the reference medicine, including
the binding to its target receptor(s) and intrinsic activity. Sometimes, the mechanism of action of the
biological product will be disease specific.
c)
The relationship between dose/exposure and response/efficacy of the reference medicine (the
therapeutic “concentration-response” curve) is sufficiently characterised.
d)
At least one PD marker is accepted as a surrogate marker for efficacy, and the relationship between
dose/exposure to the product and this surrogate marker is validated and well-known. A PD marker
may be considered a surrogate marker for efficacy if therapy-induced changes of that marker can
explain changes in the clinical outcome.
Examples include absolute neutrophil count to assess the effect of granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor, and early viral load reduction in chronic hepatitis C to assess the effect of alpha interferons.
The choice of the surrogate marker for use in PK/PD studies should be justified.
If PK/PD studies are used to demonstrate comparability of the biosimilar, care should be taken to investigate
a relevant dose range to demonstrate assay sensitivity5.13.
The margins (limits) defining clinical comparability of PK and PD parameters must be defined a priori and
justified5.14.
Page 15 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
4.2.4. Clinical efficacy studies
The physico-chemical and non-clinical studies should be sufficient to establish molecular and functional
similarity between the biosimilar API and reference medicine API prior to any clinical studies of efficacy.
Comparative clinical trials will be necessary to demonstrate clinical comparability between the biosimilar and
the reference medicine, and not the clinical efficacy de novo. Clinical comparability margins should be pre-
specified and justified, primarily on clinical grounds. As for all clinical comparability trial designs, assay
sensitivity must be ensured.
If a clinical comparability trial design is not feasible, other designs should be explored.
Where the clinical effects of the medicine have been shown to be related to the same mode of action and the
safety and efficacy of the biosimilar medicine and the reference product have been demonstrated for a
particular clinical indication, it may be possible to extrapolate these data to other indications of the reference
product that have not been independently and specifically studied for the biosimilar medicine in clinical trials.
Such extrapolation for indications is, however, not valid if the main clinical trial to demonstrate comparability
is not designed to demonstrate the non-inferiority of the biosimilar and is not able to detect potential
differences between the biosimilar and reference products. The safety and immunogenicity of the biosimilar
product must also be sufficiently characterised. The applicant should provide convincing motivation and
discuss, in detail, the scientific basis and the risk/benefit for the proposed extrapolated clinical indications.
This approach needs to be justified and supported by published and pharmacopeial evidence.
4.2.5. Clinical safety and pharmacovigilance requirements
Even if the efficacy is shown to be comparable, the biosimilar may exhibit a difference in the safety profile (in
terms of nature, severity, or frequency of adverse reactions). Pre-registration safety data should be obtained
in a number of patients sufficient to address the adverse effect profiles of the biosimilar and the reference
medicine 5.15. Care should be given to compare the type, severity, and frequency of the adverse reactions
between the biosimilar and the reference medicine.
Data from pre-registration clinical studies are normally insufficient to identify all potential differences. Clinical
safety of the biosimilar medicine must, therefore, be monitored closely on an ongoing basis during the post-
approval phase including continued benefit-risk assessment. Within the registration procedure, the applicant
Page 16 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
should present a risk management programme/pharmacovigilance plan 7.16. This should take into account risks
identified during product development and potential risks.
The applicant should give a risk specification in the application dossier for the biosimilar medicine under
review. This includes a description of possible safety issues related to the tolerability of the biosimilar medicine
that may result from a manufacturing process different from that of the originator and how these may be
assessed in the post-marketing period. The applicant should propose possible activities to encourage the
reporting of relevant adverse events, including events related to immunogenicity or loss of efficacy 5.17.
Following registration of the biosimilar, the Holder of the Certificate of Registration (HCR) must comply with
conditions of registration – the pharmacovigilance obligations will be closely monitored and reports of these
activities, with defined timelines may be required. The routine Periodic Safety Update Reports 7.18 should also
include information on adverse reaction reports, immunogenicity and any other information on tolerability or
lack of efficacy that is applicable to South Africa and the registration conditions.
It will be required that safety update information applicable to the reference medicine (product class) will be
applicable to the biosimilar. This safety information must be evaluated and assessed by the HCR of the
biosimilar in a scientific manner with regard to the causality of adverse events or adverse drug reactions and
related frequencies, and the HCR should report to SAHPRA on the actions that will be taken to ensure the safety
of patients.
4.2.6. Immunogenicity
All clinical studies should include an assessment of the immunogenicity of the product in comparison to the
reference product. The assessment of immunogenicity requires a robust antibody testing strategy,
characterisation of the observed immune response, as well as evaluation of the correlation between antibodies
and pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics, relevant for clinical safety and efficacy in all aspects.
4.2.6.1.
Principles

Assays used to assess immunogenicity should be relevant, sufficiently sensitive, and validated.

The development of neutralising antibodies and other types of specific immune response should be
assessed in healthy individuals and in the different therapeutic indications.

Immunogenicity data should be collected from enough trial subjects to assess the development and
variability of the immune response.
Page 17 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025

The impact of these immune responses on the clearance/bioavailability of the biosimilar and on the
continued safety and efficacy of the biosimilar in the different therapeutic indications should be
assessed.

Testing for immunogenicity should be performed by state-of-the-art methods using assays with
appropriate specificity and sensitivity. The screening assays should be validated and sensitive enough to
detect low titre and low-affinity antibodies. An assay for neutralising antibodies should be available for
further characterisation of antibodies detected by the screening assays.

Standard methods and international standards should be used whenever possible.

The possible interference of the circulating antigen with the antibody assays should be taken into
account.

The periodicity frequency and timing of sampling for the testing of antibodies should be justified.

In view of the unpredictability of the onset and incidence of immunogenicity, long-term results of
monitoring of antibodies at predetermined intervals will be required. In the case of chronic
administration, one-year follow-up data will be required prior to registration.

The applicant should consider the possibility of antibodies to process-related impurities.

Consideration should be given to the allergenicity of the product.
4.2.6.2.
Evaluation of the clinical significance of the observed immune response
If a difference in the immune response to the biosimilar is observed as compared to the reference medicine,
further analyses to characterise the antibodies and their implications to clinical safety, efficacy and
pharmacokinetic parameters are required. Special consideration should be given to those products where
there is a chance that the immune response could seriously affect the endogenous protein and its unique
biological function.
The applicant should consider the role of immunogenicity in certain events, such as hypersensitivity, infusion
reactions, autoimmunity, and loss of efficacy. The applicant needs to propose activities to encourage the
reporting of relevant adverse events, including events related to loss of efficacy.
4.2.7. Risk Management Plan
A suitable Risk Management Plan (RMP) should be in place (or planned) for the biosimilar medicine at the time
of application for registration. This should be fully described in the CTD dossier in Module 1.13. It may be
necessary to include South African and special population groups in these RMP activities. This RMP will form
part of the conditions of registration.
Page 18 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
Pharmacovigilance reporting procedures as defined in the current SAHPRA guidelines should be adhered to.
Additional conditions may be required as a condition of registration.
The HCR is responsible for ensuring that the product is traceable, i.e. reflection of the proprietary name of the
product on the adverse event reports.
Following registration, any specific safety monitoring requirement, safety update or package insert
amendment imposed on the reference medicine or product class should be applied, unless a waiver for such a
requirement has been approved by SAHPRA.
4.2.8. Interchangeability
a)
Biosimilars are not generic products and cannot be assumed to be identical to the reference medicine.
The Active Biological Substance(s) may have different characteristics and formulations may be different
resulting in differences in clinical performance or adverse effects.
b)
SAHPRA’s guidelines regarding biosimilars and their interchangeability are designed to ensure that these
products can be used safely and efficaciously in South Africa. Here’s a summary of the key points for
considerations:
i.
SAHPRA permits the interchangeability between a biosimilar and its reference biological medicine (or
vice versa), as well as between two different biosimilars, if both have been demonstrated to be
comparable to the same reference product.
ii.
For interchangeability, the applicant must submit a clinical variation to the Product Information (PI)
and Patient Information Leaflet (PIL) to SAHPRA. This submission should include any special warnings
or precautions to ensure patient safety. The PI should clearly state that the product is a biosimilar
medicine.
iii.
The decision to interchange a biosimilar should be made at the prescriber’s level. Treating physicians
are responsible for actively monitoring the patient during the switch from the reference product to
the biosimilar.
iv.
According to the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 101 of 1965, substitution by a pharmacist
(dispensing a different product than specified on the prescription without the treating physician’s
informed consent) does not apply to biosimilars. This means that pharmacists cannot substitute a
biosimilar for a reference biological medicine or another biosimilar without the physician's approval.
Page 19 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
v.
Physicians should prescribe the biosimilar or reference biological medicine by its trade name, not the
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API). This practice helps in tracking and monitoring the prescribed
medicine effectively.
vi.
Interchangeability should apply to all approved indications for both medicines. if a HCR (Applicant)
seeks approval for a new indication or different population (e.g., paediatric use), the question of
interchangeability may need to be reassessed.
vii.
Equally, substitution in terms of Section 22F (Generic substitution) of the Medicines and Related
Substances Act, 101 of 1965 (i.e. the practice by which a different product to that specified on the
prescription is dispensed to the patient without the prior informed consent of the treating physician)
does not apply to biosimilars.
Page 20 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
5.
REFERENCES
5.1
ICH Documents – see www.ICH.org
5.2
SAHPRA Guidelines and Documents – See www.sahpra.org.za
5.3
EMEA: Guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing biotechnology-derived proteins as active
substance: Quality issues (EMEA/CHMP/BWP/49348/2005), https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/similar-biological-
medicinal-products-containing-biotechnology-derived-proteins-active-substance-quality-issues-scientific-
guideline#document-history-first-version-7782
5.4
EMEA: Guideline on similar biological products (CHMP/437/04). https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/similar-
biological-medicinal-products-scientific-guideline
5.5
EMEA: Guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing biotechnology-derived proteins as active
substance:
non-clinical
and
clinical
issues
(EMEA/CHMP/BMWP/42832/2005),
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/similar-biological-medicinal-products-containing-biotechnology-derived-
proteins-active-substance-non-clinical-clinical-issues-scientific-guideline
5.6
ICH Q7 Good manufacturing practice guide for active pharmaceutical ingredients
5.7
ICH Q8 Pharmaceutical development
5.8
Guidelines on Evaluation of Similar Biotherapeutic Products (SBPs); WHO/BS/09.2110; 2009.
5.9
SAHPRA Pharmaceutical and Analytical CTD/eCTD Guideline
5.10
ICH Q9 Quality risk management
5.11
ICH M3 (R1) 2000: Note for guidance on non-clinical safety studies for the conduct of human clinical trials for
pharmaceuticals (CPMP/ICH/286/95)
5.12
EMEA:
Guideline
on
clinical
investigation
of
the
pharmacokinetics
of
therapeutic
proteins
(EMEA/CHMP/89249/2004) 
5.13
IK. Hwang, T Morikawa. Design issues in noninferiority/equivalence trials. In: Drug Information Journal, Vol. 33,
pp. 1205–1218, 1999
5.14
PJ. Atherton Skaff, JA Sloan, Design and Analysis of Equivalence Clinical Trials Via the SAS® System
http://www2.sas.com/proceedings/sugi23/Stats/p218.pdf
5.15
ICH E10 - Note for guidance on choice of control group in clinical trials (CPMP/ICH/364/96)
5.16
ICH E9 - Note for guidance on statistical principles for clinical trials (CPMP/ICH/363/96)
5.17
SAHPRA: Post-Marketing Reporting of ADRs to Human Medicines in South Africa.
5.18
EMEA:
Guideline
risk
management
systems
for
medicinal
products
for
human
use
(EMEA/CHMP
96286/2005).https://www.sahpra.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/SAHPGL-CEM-PV-03-Risk-Management-
Plan-for-Medicines-for-Human-Use_Sept-2022_v1.pdf
5.19
ICH E2E: Note for Guidance on Planning Pharmacovigilance Activities (CPMP/ICH/5716/03)
5.20
ICH E2C (R1): Periodic Safety Update Reports
Page 21 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
6.
VALIDITY
This guideline document is valid for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of revision [2.30 
Biosimilar Medicine Quality, Non-clinical and Clinical Requirements]. It will be reviewed in this timeframe or
as and when required.
Page 22 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
ANNEXURE 1: Product Class Specific for Monoclonal Antibodies
1.
Introduction
This product class-specific annexure outlines the quality, non-clinical and clinical data requirements specific
for the registration of monoclonal antibody (mAb) containing medicines considered by the applicant as similar
to a reference product already registered by SAHPRA. While Annexure 1 is specifically related to mAbs, the
principles discussed can also be applied to related substances, for example fusion proteins based on IgG Fc (-
cept molecules).
The annexure takes into account that different mAb products may share some properties but may differ in
other aspects such as mechanism of action and antigenicity. It is recognised that mAbs are complex structures
with complex and multiple functional domains within a single molecule. mAbs may thus differ in terms of
antibody-antigen binding regions and their secondary biological effects.
The quality aspects related to this class of biosimilar medicinal products should conform to those described in
the principal document – the general biosimilar medicines guideline document. The biosimilar and the
reference product should be structurally, physicochemically and biologically similar. The clinical and non-
clinical studies should be designed to detect any potential differences between the reference product and the
biosimilar product and to clearly identify the relevance of any such differences if present.
2.
Scope
This document is supplementary to the South African Biosimilar Medicines Guidelines and should be read in
conjunction with the said document.
The annexure provides acceptable principles for registering biosimilar mAbs that are claimed to be similar to
reference products of assured quality, safety and efficacy that have been based on a full dossier, by SAHPRA.
3.
Quality
The quality comparison showing molecular similarity between the reference product and the biosimilar is
indispensable. The development of the biosimilar should involve an extensive characterisation of a number of
representative lots of the product that are shown to be similar to the reference product in all relevant quality
attributes: structural, biochemical and biological properties.
Page 23 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
As set out in the requirements for the South African Biosimilar Medicines Guidelines, the manufacture of the
biosimilar should be based on a comprehensively designed production process taking all relevant guidelines
into account. The manufacturing process should be consistent, robust and in compliance with the current Good
Manufacturing Practices (SAGMP).
4.
Non-clinical Studies
Non-clinical studies should be performed before commencing clinical trials. In principle, in vitro studies should
be performed first, and the outcomes used to determine the in vivo studies required. The overall approach to
the non-clinical and clinical studies must be fully justified in the non-clinical overview.
4.1 In vitro Studies
Data from at least three independent batches of the biosimilar mAb product used in the in vitro studies, one
of which must be a production batch, should be provided.
The studies should specifically include:

Binding of antibody to target antigen or antigens.

Binding to isoforms of the relevant Fc gamma receptors.

Fab-associated functions such as receptor activation or blockade.

Fc-associated functions such as antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, complement-
dependent cytotoxicity, and complement activation.
All such studies should be comparative and aim to detect differences between the biosimilar and the reference
product. The studies should cover the functional aspects of the mAb, including those that may not be
considered essential for the therapeutic action of the medicinal product.
The applicant should rather consider developing and registering the biosimilar as a new product if it is not
possible to demonstrate the biosimilarity of the biosimilar and reference mAb products through suitable
non-clinical studies.
4.2.
In vivo Studies
When outcomes of the in vitro studies show that it is not possible to fully demonstrate biosimilarity of the
biosimilar and reference products, it is necessary to further evaluate biosimilarity by in vivo studies. The
applicant should consider the necessity of such in vivo studies after, for instance, taking into account:

Significant and relevant differences in formulation and the use of specific excipients.
Page 24 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025

Quality issues such as different amounts of chemical or biochemical substances in the candidate and
reference products.

Availability and relevance of in vitro assays to the mechanisms of action
The scope of in vivo studies should consider whether additional information is needed on pharmacokinetics
and safety issues. Animal models should conform to relevant ethical and scientific principles and guidelines.
It is recognised that the different production processes used by the manufacturers of the reference and
biosimilars may result in qualitative differences in levels of impurities and product-related substances. These
differences may affect the biological effects of the mAb and have clinically important effects on the
immunogenic potential of the biosimilars.
Studies on safety pharmacology and reproduction toxicology are not required for non-clinical testing of
biosimilar mAbs. Studies on local tolerance are usually not required but may have to be evaluated if excipients
are present in the formulation for which there is insufficient clinical experience.
5.
Clinical Studies
Comparative clinical studies between the biosimilar and reference medicinal product should always be
conducted. The number and type of such studies may vary, and the design of such studies should be
scientifically justified.
A stepwise approach should be utilised, and the number of patients enrolled should be determined by the
level of evidence obtained by the preceding steps that had been designed to support comparability.
6.
Pharmacokinetics (PK)
The first step in comparing the biosimilar and reference mAb products is usually a study of their
pharmacokinetic properties. The design of such studies depends on many factors including clinical context,
safety, and the PK characteristics of the antibody. The applicant should take into account the
recommendations of the SA Biosimilar Medicines Guidelines and Good Clinical Practice Guidelines (cGCP).
Assays should be appropriate for their intended use and adequately validated.
The study design should show comparability of the pharmacokinetics of the biosimilar and the reference
product in an appropriate study population. The sample size should be appropriate to prove equivalence.
Page 25 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
Healthy volunteers are more homogeneous, have less target-mediated clearance, and therefore more likely to
have uniform outcomes in PK studies. A single-dose study in healthy volunteers is recommended.
The potential influence of immunogenicity of long half-life mAb may best be studied in parallel groups. It
should be considered whether it will be more appropriate to perform the PK study in a different population
from that selected to establish similar clinical efficacy. The choice of the patient and healthy volunteer
population for the PK study should be fully justified; such justification may be based on a review of the scientific
literature. It is recommended that in an instance where PK studies are performed in healthy volunteers,
supportive PK data be obtained in clinical patients to support evidence of similar PK behaviour of the biosimilar
and reference mAb.
The design of the studies to evaluate biosimilar PK/PD should amongst others, take into account:
6.1
Disease and patient characteristics: age range; number of previous treatments; concomitant
treatments; and disease stage.
6.2
PK characteristics of the reference mAb: the PK of anticancer mAb may depend on the tumour burden
that could be affected by multiple treatment doses; target and non-target mediated clearance mechanisms;
and influence of potential receptor shedding.
6.3
If an mAb is registered for several clinical indications, it is usually not required to investigate the PK
profile in all of these diseases. It is, however, necessary to do separate PK studies if the mAb is indicated in
distinct therapeutic areas, for instance, treatment for cancer and autoimmune disease. At least one of these
studies should be adequately sized to prove the equivalence between the products, while the other PK study
needs to be designed to provide supportive descriptive PK data in the other indication.
6.4
In principle, it is usually not required to test all the therapeutic dosage regimens; the applicant should
select the dose most likely to detect potential differences in the PK of the candidate and reference biosimilar
medicinal products. It should be noted that a single-dose study with the lowest therapeutic dose in patients is
considered the best design to investigate differences in target-mediated clearance.
6.5
If there are different routes of administration (intravenous, subcutaneous), and both these are applied
for, both should preferably be investigated. It may be possible to waive the evaluation of intravenous
administration of comparability if both absorption and elimination have been demonstrated for the
subcutaneous route using additional PK parameters such as AUC.
Page 26 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
6.6
The sampling times should be selected to characterise the whole PK profile, including the elimination
phase. It is important to characterise the full concentration-time profile at a steady state in cases of non-linear
PK of the reference mAb. This is particularly relevant if the anticancer mAb exhibits dose- or time-dependent
PK or immunogenicity-related changes in distribution or elimination kinetic properties.
6.7
In a single-dose study, the primary parameter should be the AUC(0-inf). Secondary parameters such
as Cmax, tmax, volume of distribution, and half-life, should also be estimated.
6.8
In a multiple-dose study, the primary parameters should be truncated AUC after the first
administration until the second administration (AUC(0-t)) and AUC over a dosage interval at a steady state.
6.9
Anti-drug antibodies, i.e. antibodies against the mAb medicinal product, should be measured in
parallel to the PK assessment with appropriate sampling time intervals.
6.10
Comparability margins must be defined a priori and justified. Considerable inter-subject variability
beyond 80%-125% of some parameters may have to be accounted for and justified. It should be noted that
this may impact on clinical efficacy and safety.
6.11
Usually, proof of similar PK profiles should be demonstrated before clinical efficacy trials are initiated.
If this is not the case, it must be justified on a case-to-case basis depending on the product profiles observed
in the quality and non-clinical data.
6.12
PD parameters may sometimes add to the comparability proof for certain mAbs and certain clinical
indications: PK studies can be combined with multiple PD endpoints (if such exist). It is noted that there are
often no specific PD endpoints, and the comparison will then have to focus on non-clinical PD evaluations such
as in vitro testing.
6.13
PD markers should be explored as pivotal proof of comparability. Dose-concentration-response or
time-response relationships, selected to be within the linear part of the dose-response curve, may provide
strong evidence of comparability of the candidate and reference biosimilar products. If the PD markers are
provided as pivotal evidence of comparability of efficacy, their selection should be based on evidence of
sensitivity to dose-response relationships in previous studies with the reference drug, and at least one PD
marker can be related to patient outcome or the pharmacological effect of the molecule.
7.
Clinical Similarity
Page 27 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
If dose-comparative and sensitive PD studies cannot convincingly demonstrate comparability in a clinically
relevant manner, it is necessary to show similar clinical efficacy of the reference product and the biosimilar in
an adequately randomised, parallel-group comparative clinical trial in accordance with cGCP. Deviations from
these established guidelines must be scientifically justified on the basis that the proposal is designed to
establish biosimilarity by using PD markers, clinical outcomes, or both. The guiding principle is to demonstrate
equivalent efficacy and comparable safety of the biosimilar compared to the reference product, not patient
benefit per se.
7.1
Comparability should be demonstrated in appropriate clinical models and the applicant should justify
the choice of model in terms of safety and efficacy.
7.2
The safety of patients should not be compromised, and patients should not be exposed to the drug
unless clinically indicated and warranted.
In anticancer therapy, clinical and safety margins may be difficult to set, and it may be challenging to
demonstrate equivalence. The preferred endpoint would be progression or disease-free survival or overall
survival. Applicants are referred to the Guideline on the evaluation of anticancer medicinal products in man
(see References). Such endpoints may not be feasible or sensitive enough to establish comparability. In all
instances, the focus should be to demonstrate similar efficacy and safety compared to the reference product
and not patient benefit per se.
7.3
Clinical studies in special populations like the paediatric population or the elderly are normally not
required since the overall objective of the development programme is to establish comparability, and,
therefore, the selection of the primary patient population is driven by the need for homogeneity and
sensitivity.
8.
Clinical Safety
The demonstration of clinical safety is part of the pivotal clinical study or studies demonstrating comparability.
The type, severity and incidence of adverse reactions should be compared, focusing on those that have been
documented for the reference product. It is advisable to use the same definitions as those that have been
used for the reference product.
Immunogenicity assessment is an important aspect and should be evaluated on a comparative basis. Note
specifically the clinical outcomes of loss of efficacy and resistance against further treatment. It may, therefore,
Page 28 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
not be advisable to include in the clinical trial group patients who have been treated with the reference
product.
In some cases, the development of antibodies is best detected in the healthy volunteer group. It is also
important to take into account the potential effects of using a different expression system in evaluating the
biosimilar and the reference product. Also, consider the dose of the mAb in relation to the expression of
immunogenicity. It should be noted that a higher immunogenicity of the biosimilar compared to the reference
product may impact the benefit/risk ratio and may cast doubt on biosimilarity.
Additional long-term immunogenicity and safety data are required as part of the post-marketing authorisation
and should be thoroughly discussed in the risk management plan.
9.
Pharmacovigilance
The application for registration should include a comprehensive risk management plan on how safety will be
monitored after the registration of the medicine. This should at least address:
9.1
Occurrence of rare and potentially serious adverse events such as susceptible risk of infection in
specific population groups that are described and predicted based on the evidence provided by studies of the
reference product.
The pharmacovigilance plan may include participation of existing patient registries or large population-based
databases and must be part of the risk management plan.
Page 29 of 29
SAHPGL-PEM-BIO-02_v5
Biosimilar Medicine, Quality, Non-Clinical and Clinical Requirements
12 November 2025
10
REFERENCES
10.1 EMEA: Guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing biotechnology-derived proteins as
active substance: Quality issues (EMEA/CHMP/BWP/49348/2005)
10.2
EMEA: Guideline on development, production, characterisation and specifications for monoclonal
antibodies and related substances (EMEA/CHMP/BWP/157653/2007)
10.3
WHO:
Guidelines
on
evaluation
of
similar
biotherapeutic
products
(http://www.who.int/biologicals/areas/biological_therapeutics/BIOTHERAPEUTICS_FOR_WEB_22APRI
L2010.pdf)
10.4
CHMP: Guideline on the clinical investigation of the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic proteins
(CHMP/EWP/89249/2004)
10.5
CHMP: Guideline on the investigation of bioequivalence (CPMP/EWP/QWP/1401/98 Rev. 1/ Corr)
10.6
EMEA: Guideline on bio-analytical method validation (EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009).
10.7
SA GCP 2010. Guidelines for Good Practice in the Conduct of Clinical Trials with Human Participants in
South Africa. Department of Health: Pretoria, South Africa (https://www.sahpra.org.za/document/sa-gcp-
guidelines/)
10.7
CHMP: Guideline on the evaluation of anticancer medicinal products in man (CHMP/EWP/205/95/2006)
10.8
SA GMP: Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices in South Africa. Department of Health: Pretoria,
South Africa. https://www.sahpra.org.za/document/gSauideline-for-good-manufacturing-practice/
