SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 1 of 49
 
 
 
27 February 2025 
GUIDELINE FOR CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES AND 
IVDS 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to interested persons wishing to submit applications for the licensing of 
manufacturers, distributors and wholesalers, and registration of medical devices and IVDs. It represents the Authority’s current 
thinking on the safety, quality and performance of medical devices and IVDs. It is not intended as an exclusive approach. The Authority 
reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality, and performance of a medical device or IVD 
in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. Alternative approaches may be used but these should be scientifically 
and technically justified. 
 
The Authority is committed to ensure that all registered medical devices and IVDs will be of the required quality, safety and 
performance. It is important that applicants adhere to the administrative requirements to avoid delays in the processing and 
evaluation of applications. Guidelines and application forms are available from the office of the Chief Executive Officer and the 
website. 
 
NOTE: This guideline presents the classification rules for a Medical Device or IVD and should be read in conjunction with the 
Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965), and the Regulations to this Act. 
 
Document History 
Final 
Version 
Reason for Amendment 
Effective Date 
1 
First issue, published for implementation as part of 8.01 General 
Guideline Medical Devices and IVDs 
August 2016 
2 
Approved administrative updates 
November 2019 
3 
Content structured on new SAHPRA Template  
Old guideline no 8.05 allocated new document number SAHPGL-MD-04 
March 2023 
4 
− 
Administrative changes (section 4.1.3, rule 8) 
− 
Update to flow charts and content numbering 
February 2024 
5 
− 
Update on rules 6, 7, 8 (a), 8 (h), 8 (l), 8(n), removal of 8(o) and section 
4.7 (Fixation screws) 
February 2025 
 
 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 2 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Contents 
Document History ................................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary ................................................................................................................................................................ 3 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.1 
Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.2 
Scope .......................................................................................................................................................... 5 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
3. 
CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES (Non- IVDs) .................................................................................. 5 
3.1 
Overview .................................................................................................................................................... 5 
3.2 
Principles for applying the classification rules ........................................................................................... 6 
3.3 
Medical Devices with a measuring function .............................................................................................. 7 
3.4 
Examples of Medical Devices and whether they have a measuring function............................................ 8 
3.5 
Medical devices required to be sterile ....................................................................................................... 9 
4. 
APPLICATION OF CLASSIFICATION RULES................................................................................................. 10 
4.1 
Classification of non-IVD medical devices ................................................................................................ 11 
4.2 
Duration of use classification: transient, short-term, and long-term use ............................................... 13 
4.3 
Classification of non-invasive medical devices ........................................................................................ 13 
4.4 
Classification of Invasive Medical Devices ............................................................................................... 15 
4.5 
Classification of active medical devices ................................................................................................... 22 
4.6 
Additional Classification Rules 13, 14, 15 & 16 ........................................................................................ 26 
4.7 
Other classification examples .................................................................................................................. 28 
4.8 
Classification of IVD medical devices ....................................................................................................... 31 
4.9 
Principles for application of the classification rules ................................................................................. 32 
4.10 Classification rules for IVDs ...................................................................................................................... 34 
4.11 Rationale and examples for classification rules for IVDs ......................................................................... 38 
5. 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 48 
6. 
VALIDITY ................................................................................................................................................... 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 3 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term 
Meaning 
IVD 
In Vitro Diagnostic  
SAHPRA 
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
SAL 
Sterility Assurance Level  
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 4 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The registration of medical devices and IVDs in South Africa is governed by the provisions and requirements of 
the Medicines and Related Substances Control Act No. 101 of 1965, (hereafter 'the Act') and the Regulations 
and Guidelines published in terms thereof. 
Copies of the legislation can be obtained from the SAHPRA website www.sahpra.org.za  
This guideline provides the classification rules for the classification of medical devices (Non-IVDs and IVDs) in 
South Africa. 
The aim of this Guideline is to assist manufacturers, importers, distributors, and wholesalers of medical devices 
and IVDs in the classification of medical devices and IVDs required for the licensing of manufacturers, 
distributors and wholesalers and registration of medical devices or IVDs. The types of medical devices or IVDs 
include all products classified as per the different Classes based on a risk assessment and intended use. 
The Guideline is meant to provide guidance in meeting the requirements of the Act. It is acknowledged, 
however, that in some instances scientific developments may dictate alternative approaches. When a 
deviation from a guideline is decided on, a detailed motivation giving the reason(s) for the deviation and 
justification for the alternative approach should be included in the expert report submitted with the 
application. 
Whenever there is doubt, applicants are advised to consult The Authority (SAHPRA) for confirmation and/ or 
clarification before completing and submitting the application form; refer to the website for contact details. 
Applicants should always refer to the current version of the relevant Classification Rules for Medical Devices 
and IVDs and the Addenda thereto. 
Guidelines are constantly evolving as a result of scientific developments and harmonization of the 
requirements of regional and international regulatory authorities. The Authority (SAHPRA) endeavors to 
regularly update the guidelines to reflect current thinking and keep its technical requirements and evaluation 
policies in line with “best international medical device and IVD regulatory practice”. 
1.1 
Purpose 
The purpose of this guideline is to assist manufacturers, importers, distributors and wholesalers of medical 
devices and IVDs in identifying the classes of the products which they manufacture, import, export and 
distribute in accordance with Act 101 of 1965. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 5 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
1.2 
Scope 
This guideline is applicable to IVD and non-IVD medical devices. 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION 
Refer to the General Regulations relating to Medical Devices and IVDs and to the Medicines and Related 
Substances Act, 101 of 1965. 
3. 
CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES (Non- IVDs)  
3.1 
Overview 
The medical devices regulatory framework has a classification system for medical devices and IVDs, as per the 
medical device Regulations of Act 101 of 1965. 
A medical device (non-IVD), other than an IVD medical device, has the medical device classification applying 
under the classification rules set out in the Classification Rules for Medical Devices. 
An IVD medical device has the medical device classification applying under the classification rules set out in 
the Classification Rules for IVDs. 
The classification levels for medical devices are: 
Classification 
Level of risk 
Class A 
Low risk 
Class B 
Low–moderate risk 
Class C 
Moderate – high risk 
Class D 
High risk – where risk relates to the patient or to public health 
 
The manufacturer or distributor is responsible for determining the classification of a medical device using a set 
of classification rules supplied by the Authority, based on the:  
a) Manufacturer’s or distributor’s intended use of the device or IVD  
b) Level of risk to patients, users and other persons (the probability of occurrence of harm and the 
severity of that harm)  
c) Degree of invasiveness in the human body  
d) Duration of use and exposure. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 6 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Identical medical devices may be classified differently if they are to be used in different parts of the body. This 
is why the original manufacturer’s intended use of the device is critical to determining the appropriate 
classification. The intended use can be obtained from the: 
a) Instructions for use 
b) Label 
c) Original manufacturer’s advertising materials 
d) Technical documentation 
NOTE: There may be medical devices or IVDs where the classification in South Africa is different to the 
classification in other countries. The applicant should take into account, the South African requirements when 
determining the classification of a device that is to be supplied in South Africa. 
3.2 
Principles for applying the classification rules 
The classification rules are outlined in technical rules for medical devices and technical rules for IVDs. The 
classification process is based on the manufacturer’s intended purpose, taking into account the design and 
how the medical device or IVD works. In some cases, classification is inconclusive, and more than one rule can 
apply. If this happens the higher classification applies. 
All the classification rules must be considered to determine the classification of the medical device or IVD. If 
the device is to be used in combination with another medical device, the classification rules must be applied 
separately to each device. Accessories are classified separate to the medical device they are used with. 
If the device is to be used in combination with another medical device, the classification rules must be applied 
separately to each device. 
For groups, systems and procedure packs, the classification for the entire group, system or pack is the highest 
classification of any individual device in the group, system or pack. The presence of a registered medicine in a 
procedure pack does not affect the classification. For example, if there is a device in the pack that is classified 
as Class C, then the entire pack is classified as Class C. 
Manufacturers & Distributors should pay particular attention to Rules 13, 14, 15 & 16—Additional rules, as 
these rules may not be applied consistently internationally. 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 7 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Software: 
a) that fits the definition of a medical device is also an active medical device since it relies on an energy 
source for its operation. 
b) that is intended to make a device operate, control a device, or influence the functions of a device 
generally falls in the same classification as the device. 
c) intended as an accessory to a medical device should be classified separately from the device with 
which it is used; and 
d) is considered an accessory when it is not essential to the operation of the device. 
If the intended purpose of the medical device or IVD is not clear, The Authority will request further clarification 
from the original manufacturer or Authorised Representative. If the documentation requested is not provided 
within the required period or is unclear, then The Authority will assume an intended purpose consistent with 
the purpose generally accepted in current clinical practice. 
If a medical device is intended to be used in more than one part of a patient’s body, the medical device is 
classified on the assumption that it will be used in the part of the body that poses the highest risk. For invasive 
devices, this may be the central circulatory or central nervous systems. 
In the event of a dispute resulting from application of the classification rules, The Authority shall determine 
the classification. 
3.3 
Medical Devices with a measuring function 
A medical device is considered to have a measuring function if the device is intended by the manufacturer to: 
a) measure quantitatively a physiological or anatomical parameter, or 
b) measure a quantity or a qualifiable characteristic of energy, or 
c) measure substances delivered to or removed from the human body. The measurements given by a 
medical device must: 
− 
display in South African legal units of measurement or other units of measurement acceptable 
to the Authority, or 
− 
be compared to at least one point of reference indicated in South African legal units of 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 8 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
measurement or other units of measurement acceptable to the Authority and be accurate to 
enable the device to achieve its intended purpose. 
The medical device with a measuring function must meet each of the above requirements. 
Manufacturers of medical devices that have a measuring function must prepare evidence that the device 
complies with the relevant Essential Principles, particularly Essential Principle 10. For more information, see 
Guideline for Medical devices and IVD essential principles (SAHPGL-MD-01). 
For manufacturers of Class A devices that have a measuring function, in addition to preparing a South African 
Declaration of Conformity, they must supply The Authority with conformity assessment evidence to 
demonstrate that the relevant Essential Principles have been met. 
3.4 
Examples of Medical Devices and whether they have a measuring function 
Device 
Requirements to fit the definition of measuring 
function 
Result 
Measurement of 
physiological / 
clinical 
parameters? 
Absolute 
measurement 
units / reference 
Measurement 
critical to intended 
purpose 
Clinical thermometer that 
displays patient 
temperature in °C 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Measuring function 
Forehead patch that 
indicates temperature via 
colour change 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Does not have a 
measuring function 
Time-of-day 
 
clock (HH:MM) 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Does not have a 
measuring function 
Medicine 
Measuring cup with ml or 
defined Units marked 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Measuring function 
Medicine cup with no scale 
Yes 
No 
No 
Does not have a 
measuring function 
“Biofeedback” 
electromyography (relative 
scale) 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Does not have a 
measuring function 
Diagnostic 
electromyography 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Measuring function 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 9 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
3.5 
Medical devices required to be sterile 
Some medical devices are required to be sterile when used to minimize the risk of infection. Such medical 
devices should be terminally sterilized to a Sterility Assurance Level (SAL) of at least 10-6, unless this is not 
possible due to device material incompatibility with the proposed sterilization process. 
It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to determine the most appropriate method for achieving the 
required SAL for a particular device after due consideration of the design and construction of the device. Some 
common sterilization methods are: 
a) moist heat or steam 
b) dry heat 
c) ionizing radiation 
d) ethylene oxide 
e) liquid chemical sterilization 
Devices that are required to be sterile, but cannot be subjected to terminal sterilization, can be manufactured 
aseptically, for example by sterile filtration. Devices manufactured in this manner have a lower SAL than those 
subjected to terminal sterilization. 
Manufacturers of medical devices that are required to be sterile must prepare evidence that the device 
complies with: 
a) Essential Principle 8.3 for devices that are supplied sterile. 
b) Essential Principle 8.1 for devices that are able to be reprocessed. 
For more information, please see Guideline for Medical devices and IVD essential principles (SAHPGL-MD-01). 
For manufacturers of Class A devices that are required to be sterile, in addition to preparing a South African 
Declaration of Conformity, they must supply The Authority with conformity assessment evidence to 
demonstrate that the relevant Essential Principles have been met. 
Additional standards to consider for sterilization of Medical Devices are the most recent version: 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 10 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Standard 
Title 
ISO 11135 
Sterilization of health-care products -- Ethylene oxide -- Requirements for the 
development, validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical devices 
ISO 11137-1 
Sterilization of health care products -- Radiation -- Part 1: Requirements for development, 
validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical devices 
ISO 11137-2 
Sterilization of health care products—Radiation—Part 2: Establishing the sterilization dose 
ISO 11137-3 
Sterilization of health care products—Radiation—Part 3: Guidance on dosimetric aspects 
of development, validation and routine control 
ISO 17665-1 
Sterilization of health care products—Moist heat—Part 1: Requirements for the 
development, validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical devices 
ISO 14160 
Sterilization of health care products -- Liquid chemical sterilizing agents for single-use 
medical devices utilizing animal tissues and their derivatives -- Requirements for 
characterization, development, validation and routine control of a sterilization process for 
medical devices 
ISO 11737-1 
Sterilization of medical devices—Microbiological methods—Part 1: Determination of a 
population of micro-organisms on products 
ISO 11737-2 
Sterilization of medical devices—Microbiological methods—Part 2: Tests of sterility 
performed in the validation of a sterilization process 
ISO 13408-1 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 1: General requirements 
ISO 13408-2 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 2: Filtration 
ISO 13408-3 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 3: Lyophilization 
ISO 13408-4 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 4: Clean-in-place technologies 
ISO 13408-5 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 5: Sterilization in place 
ISO 13408-6 
Aseptic processing of health care products—Part 6: Isolator systems 
ISO 14937 
Sterilization of health care products General requirements for characterization of a 
sterilizing agent and the development of routine control of a sterilization process for 
medical devices 
ISO 17664 
Sterilization of medical devices—Information to be provided by the manufacturer for the 
processing of re sterilisable medical devices 
4. 
APPLICATION OF CLASSIFICATION RULES 
Manufacturers should consider all the Classification Rules when determining the appropriate classification for 
a device as more than one rule may apply, and the higher classification applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 11 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
4.1 
Classification of non-IVD medical devices 
A high-level summary of the classification rules is noted in Diagram 1, below  
 
Diagram 1. Summary of Classification rules 
A summary of the classification process is noted in Table 1 below. 
If the device 
then apply 
Classification Rule/s 
Some examples are: 
is invasive—that is, the 
device penetrates the 
body through a body 
orifice or is inserted into 
the body during surgery 
5, 6, 7 & 8 - 
classifications vary 
depending on 
intended purpose 
surgical eye probe, ophthalmic knife, eye cannula, ear/nose/throat 
forceps, internal tympanostomy tube, tongue depressor, intraoral 
x-ray sensor, oral gag, oral suction unit, thermometer, vaginal 
speculum, urethral bougie, anoscope, proctoscope, colonoscope, 
stomal peg, tracheostomy tube. 
is active—that is, the 
device depends on a 
source of energy for its 
operation and converts 
energy 
9, 10, 11 & 12 - 
classifications vary 
depending on 
intended purpose 
diagnostic x-ray sources, MRI, air driven surgical drills and saws, 
patient monitors, electronic blood pressure measuring devices, 
diagnostic ultrasound, electronic stethoscopes/thermometers, 
software, gas regulators, radioactive seeds, mechanical infusion 
systems. 
contains a medicine 
13 - these devices 
are Class D 
antibiotic bone cements, condoms with spermicide, heparin 
coated catheters, dressings incorporating an antimicrobial agent. 
Do the “Additional rules” 
apply? 
Yes 
No 
Is 
this 
a 
non- 
Yes 
invasive device? 
Is this an invasive 
device? 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Is this an active 
device? 
Apply Classification 
Rules 13, 14, 15 & 16 
Apply Classification 
Rules 1, 2, 3 & 4 
Apply Classification 
Rules 5, 6, 7 & 8 
Apply Classification 
Rules 9, 10, 11 & 12 
No need to proceed further. 
– not a medical device 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 12 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
If the device 
then apply 
Classification Rule/s 
Some examples are: 
is for contraception or 
preventing sexually 
transmitted diseases 
16 - classifications 
vary depending on 
intended purpose 
condoms, contraceptive diaphragms, contraceptive intra- uterine 
devices (IUDs), surgically implanted contraceptive devices. 
is for disinfecting, 
cleaning, rinsing or 
hydrating 
15- classifications 
vary depending on 
intended purpose 
contact lens solutions, comfort solutions, disinfectants for 
hemodialysis devices and endoscopes, sterilizers to sterilize 
medical devices, washer disinfectors. 
not active and is intended 
to record x-ray diagnostic 
images 
10(I)—these 
devices are Class B 
x-ray films, photo-stimulable phosphor plates. 
Contains viable OR non- 
viable animal tissues or 
derivatives 
14 - these devices 
are Class D 
biological heart valves, porcine xenograft dressings, catgut 
sutures, implants and dressings made from collagen, intra-ocular 
fluids, meniscule joint fluid replacement, anti-adhesion barriers, 
tissue fillers based on hyaluronic acid derived from bacterial 
fermentation processes. 
is a blood bag 
2—these devices 
are Class C 
blood bags (including those containing or coated with an 
anticoagulant). 
is an active implantable 
medical device 
8 - these devices 
are Class D 
implantable 
pacemakers, 
defibrillators 
and 
nerve 
stimulators, 
is an active device to 
control, monitor, or 
directly influence the 
performance of an active 
implantable medical 
device 
9(ii) - these devices 
are Class D 
clinician’s programming devices for pacemakers, patient control 
devices for nerve stimulation devices. 
is a mammary implant 
8 - these devices 
are Class D 
Mammary / breast implants. 
is not covered by any of 
the previous rules in this 
table 
1, 2, 3 & 4 - 
classifications vary 
depending on 
intended purpose 
devices intended to: 
- 
collect body liquid where a return flow is unlikely 
- 
immobilise body parts and/or to apply force or compression 
- 
channel or store substances that will eventually be delivered 
into the body 
- 
treat or modify substances that will be delivered into the 
body 
- dress wounds. 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 13 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
4.2 
Duration of use classification: transient, short-term, and long-term use 
The manufacturer or distributor in determining the classification, must take into account the duration of 
use: 
Period of continuous use 
Description 
Less than 60 minutes 
Transient 
At least 60 minutes but not more than 30 days 
Short- term 
More than 30 days 
Long-Term 
4.3 
Classification of non-invasive medical devices 
This flowchart is a summary of the technical rules for classification of non-invasive Medical Devices. 
 
 
RULE 1: Non-invasive devices intended to have contact with injured skin. 
This rule covers wound dressings without consideration of the wound depth. The technology associated 
with these devices is well understood and they are not considered potentially hazardous to the patient. 
Rule 1 
Description 
1 (a) A non-invasive device to be used as a mechanical 
barrier or for compression or for absorption of exudates—
Class A. 
Examples: absorbent pads, island dressings, cotton wool, 
wound strips and gauze dressings to act as a barrier or 
absorb exudates from the wound. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 14 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 1 
Description 
Note: if the device is sterile, conformity evidence is 
required. 
1 (b) A non-invasive device to be used in contact with 
injured skin (including a device the principal intention of 
which is to manage the microenvironment of a wound)—
Class B. 
Assists healing by controlling the level of moisture and 
regulating the humidity, temperature, levels of oxygen, 
other gases and pH values of the wound environment, 
or by influencing the process by other physical means. 
Examples: adhesives for topical use, polymer film 
dressings, hydrogel dressings and non-medicated 
impregnated gauze dressings. 
1 (c) A non-invasive device to be used for wounds that 
have breached the dermis and where the wounds can only 
heal by secondary intent—Class C. 
Intended for severe wounds that have extensively 
breached the dermis, and healing is by secondary intent 
(by granulation from the base of the wound). 
Examples: dressings for chronic extensive ulcerated 
wounds, severe burn, severe decubitus wounds, or 
dressings providing a temporary skin substitute. 
 
RULE 2: Non-invasive devices intended to channel or store body liquids or tissues, liquids or gases. 
Devices covered under this rule may include those that channel or store substances that will be eventually 
delivered into the body. 
Rule 2 
Description 
2 (a) A non-invasive device used to channel or store body 
liquids or tissues, liquids or gases that are to be infused, 
administered or introduced into a patient—Class A. 
Intended to be used to channel or store liquids. Examples: 
administration sets for gravity infusion, syringes without 
needles. 
2 (b) A non-invasive device to channel or store a liquid or 
gas that is to be infused, administered or introduced into a 
patient and may be connected to an active medical device 
classified as Class B or higher—Class B. 
Examples: oxygen tubing and masks; anesthetic tubing 
and breathing circuits; and syringes and tubing for 
infusion pumps. 
2 (c) A non-invasive device to channel blood, to store or 
channel other body liquids, or to store an organ, parts of 
an organ or body tissue that is to be later introduced into 
a patient—Class B. 
Examples: Tubes for blood transfusion, devices to 
temporarily store and transport of organs for transplant 
or for long-term storage of biological substances and 
tissues such as corneas, sperm and human embryos. 
2 (d) A non-invasive device to store blood – i.e. blood bags 
-Class C. 
Note: if the blood bags have a function greater than storing 
purposes and include systems for preservation other than 
anti-coagulants then other rules may apply. 
Examples: Blood bags which do not incorporate an 
anticoagulant 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 15 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
RULE 3: Noninvasive devices intended to modify the biological or chemical composition of blood, other 
body liquids or other liquids. 
Devices covered under this rule may include those that modify the biological or chemical composition of 
substances that will be delivered into the body. 
Rule 3 
Description 
3 (a) A non-invasive device to modify the biological or 
chemical composition of blood, other body liquids, or other 
liquids to be infused in the patient —Class C. 
Devices intended to remove undesirable substances out 
of the blood by exchange of solutes such as 
hemodyalizers.  
Examples: Auto transfusion systems and devices used to 
separate cells such as gradient medium for sperm. 
3 (b) A non-invasive device to be used in treatment 
consisting of filtration, centrifugation or exchanges of gas 
or heat—Class B. 
Examples: 
particulate 
filtration of 
blood 
in an 
extracorporeal circulation system, centrifugation of blood 
for transfusion or auto transfusion, removal of carbon 
dioxide from the blood and/or adding oxygen and 
warming or cooling blood in the extracorporeal 
circulatory system. 
 
RULE 4: Other non-invasive devices 
This rule applies to all medical devices that are not covered by a specific rule, devices that contact intact 
skin and devices that do not touch the patient. 
Rule 4 
Description 
A non-invasive device is Class A, unless the device is 
classified at a higher level under another rule. 
Devices used to collect body liquid where a return flow is 
unlikely. Examples: urine collection bottles, ostomy 
pouches, wound drainage collection bottles and 
incontinence pads. 
Devices used to immobilise body parts and/or to apply 
force or compression. Examples: non-sterile dressings, 
plaster bandages, cervical collars and gravity traction 
devices or compression hosiery. 
4.4 
Classification of Invasive Medical Devices 
RULE 5: Invasive devices intended to be used to penetrate body orifices. 
This rule covers devices that enter the body through existing body orifices (for example, ear, mouth, nose, 
eye) and surgically created stomas. Devices covered by this rule tend to be for diagnostic and therapeutic 
use in particular specialties (ear, nose, and throat; ophthalmology; dentistry; proctology; urology; and 
gynecology). 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 16 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
 
Rule 5 
Description 
5 (a) Invasive devices that are not connected to 
an active medical device, or are intended for 
connection to a Class A medical device only and 
are for transient use—Class A. 
Examples: handheld dental mirrors, dental impression materials, 
exam gloves, prostatic balloon dilation catheters. 
5 (b) Invasive devices that are not connected to 
an active medical device, or are intended for 
connection to a Class A medical device only and 
are for short- term use—Class B. 
Examples: hard contact lenses, urinary catheters, tracheal tubes, 
stents, vaginal pessaries, perineal reduction devices. 
5 (c) Invasive devices that are for short-term use   
in the oral cavity as far as the pharynx, in an ear 
canal to the ear drum, or in a nasal cavity—Class 
A. 
Examples: dressing for nose bleeds, dentures removable by the 
patient. 
5 (d) Invasive devices that are not connected to 
an active medical device, or are intended for 
connection to a Class A medical device only and 
are for long- term use—Class C. 
Examples: long-term urinary catheters, artificial eyes, urethral 
stents, contact lenses for long-term continuous use. 
5 (e) Invasive devices for long-term use in the oral 
cavity as far as the pharynx or in an ear canal to 
the ear drum, or in a nasal cavity and are not 
liable to be absorbed by the mucous membrane—
Class B. 
Examples: orthodontic wire, fixed dental prostheses, fissures 
sealants. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 17 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 5 
Description 
5 (f) Invasive device with respect to body orifices, 
to be connected to an active medical device that 
is classified as Class B or higher—Class B. 
Examples: tracheostomy tubes connected to a ventilator, powered 
nasal irrigators, nasopharyngeal airways, heat and moisture 
exchangers, suction catheters or tubes for stomach drainage.  
(Independent of the time for which they are invasive) 
 
RULE 6: Surgically invasive devices intended for transient use 
This rule covers devices that are to be used continuously for less than 60 minutes and are used to create a 
conduit through the skin (needles, cannulae), surgical instruments (scalpels, saws), various types of 
catheters and suckers. 
 
Rule 6 
Description 
6 (a) Surgically invasive device for transient use – Class B. 
Examples: suture needles, hypodermic needles and 
syringes, suckers, surgical swabs, surgical gloves.  
Metal fixation screw—used to hold bone together 
temporarily (up to 60 minutes) during surgery. 
6 (b) A reusable surgical instrument – Class A. 
Examples: scissors, artery forceps, tissue forceps, tissue 
clamps, excavators, osteotomes, chisels. 
6 (c) A surgically invasive device for transient use to supply 
energy in form of ionizing radiation – Class C. 
Examples: 
catheters 
containing 
or 
incorporating 
radioactive isotopes where the isotope is not intended to 
be released into the body. 
6 (d) A surgically invasive device for transient use to have a Where the biological effect is an intended one rather than 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 18 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 6 
Description 
biological effect or be wholly or mainly absorbed – Class C. unintentional. e.g. bone wax 
“Absorption” refers to the degradation of a material 
within the body and the metabolic elimination of the 
resulting degradation products from the body 
This rule does not apply for substances that are excreted   
without modification from the body i.e. insufflation gases 
for the abdominal cavity. 
6 (e) A surgically invasive device for transient use to 
administer medicine via a delivery system, and where the 
administration is potentially hazardous to the patient – 
Class C. 
Devices for repeated self-application where the dose 
and the medicine are critical. 
Examples: personal insulin injectors (commonly referred 
to as ‘pens’). 
6 (f) Surgically invasive device intended for use in direct 
contact with the central nervous system – Class D 
 
6 (g) Surgically invasive device for transient use to 
diagnose, monitor, control or correct a defect of the heart, 
or central circulatory system through direct contact – Class 
D. 
Examples: cardiovascular catheters, angioplasty balloon 
catheters, coronary artery probes. 
 
RULE 7: surgically invasive devices intended for short-term use 
This rule covers devices to be used continuously for at least 60 minutes but not more than 30 days and are 
used in the context of surgery or post-operative care (for example, clamps and drains), infusion devices 
(cannulae and needles) and catheters. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 19 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 7 
Description 
7 (a) Surgically invasive device for short-term use – Class B. Examples: clamps, infusion cannulae, skin closure devices 
or temporary filling materials, some surgical retractors for 
example, chest retractors for cardiac surgery.  
Metal fixation screw – used to hold bone together for up 
to 30 days (for example, to support healing of a fracture) 
 
7 (b) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to 
administer medicine – Class C. 
Examples: intravenous cannulae. 
7 (c) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to 
undergo a chemical change in a patient’s body (except a 
device intended to be placed in the teeth) – Class C. 
Examples: surgical/ tissue adhesives. 
7 (d) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to supply 
energy in the form of ionizing radiation – Class C. 
Examples: bradytherapy devices. 
7 (e) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to have 
biological effect – Class D. 
Examples: haemostatic sponge. 
7 (f) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to be 
wholly, or mostly, absorbed by a patient’s body – Class D. 
Examples: absorbable sutures. 
7 (g) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to be 
used in direct contact with the central nervous system – 
Class D. 
Examples: neurological catheters, cortical electrodes, 
connonoid paddles. 
7 (h) A surgically invasive device for short-term use to be 
specifically used to diagnose, monitor, control or correct a 
defect of the heart, or central circulatory system, through 
direct contact with these parts of the body – Class D. 
Examples: cardiovascular catheters, cardiac output 
probes and temporary pacemaker leads, thoracic 
catheters intended to drain the heart, including the 
pericardium and a carotid artery shunt. 
7 (i) A surgically invasive device for short-term use that is 
intended by the manufacturer to be placed in the teeth and 
to undergo a chemical change in the body – Class B. 
 
Note: for this clause, a medical device to be placed in the 
teeth includes a device that is intended to penetrate a tooth 
but that does not enter the gum or bone beyond the tooth. 
Examples: dental adhesives used for root canal therapy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 20 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
RULE 8: Surgically invasive devices for long-term use and implantable devices 
Devices covered by this rule include implants used in orthopaedic, dental, ophthalmic and cardiovascular 
fields. In addition, soft tissue implants used in plastic surgery are covered by this rule. 
 
Rule 8 
Description 
8 (a) Implantable devices and surgically invasive devices for 
long-term use – Class D. 
Examples: 
hip, 
knee, ankle 
and 
shoulder 
joint 
replacement systems; spinal disc replacements or 
implants, shunts, stents, intra-ocular lenses, infusion 
ports, and peripheral vascular grafts.   
8 (b) A surgically invasive device for long-term use to be 
placed in the teeth – Class B. 
Examples: bridges and crowns, dental filing materials and 
pins, dental alloys and polymers.  
8 (c) A surgically invasive device for long-term use to be 
used in direct contact with the heart, the central circulatory 
system or the central nervous system – Class D. 
Examples: prosthetic heart valves, aneurysm clips, 
vascular prostheses, spinal stents, vascular stents, CNS 
electrodes, cardiovascular sutures. 
8 (d) A surgically invasive device intended to be life 
supporting or life sustaining – Class D 
Example: pacemakers 
8 (e) A surgically invasive device intended to be an active 
implantable medical device – Class D 
 
8 (f) An implantable accessory to an active implantable 
medical device – Class D. 
Example: electrode leads associated with pacemakers, 
defibrillators, nerve stimulators. 
8 (g) An active device to control, monitor or directly 
influence the performance of an active implantable 
medical device – Class D. 
Example: clinician’s programming device for pacemakers, 
patient control device for nerve stimulation devices. 
8 (h) A surgically invasive device for long-term use intended Implants claimed to be bioactive, including implants with 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 21 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
by the manufacturer to have a biological effect – Class D. 
bioactive coating (Hydroxyapatite is considered as having 
biological effect only if so claimed and demonstrated by 
the manufacturer). 
8 (i) A surgically invasive device for long-term use to be 
wholly, or mostly, absorbed by a patient’s body – Class D. 
Examples: absorbable sutures, bioactive adhesives and 
implants through the attachment of surface coatings such 
as phosphorylcholine. 
8 (j) A surgically invasive device for long-term use to 
administer medicine – Class D. 
Examples: rechargeable non-active drug delivery systems. 
8 (k) A surgically invasive device for long-term use to 
undergo a chemical change in the patient’s body (except a 
device that is to be placed in the teeth) – Class D. 
Examples: surgical adhesive. 
8 (l) Breast Implants and surgical meshes – Class D 
 
8 (m) A surgically invasive device for long-term use that is 
intended by the manufacturer to be placed in the teeth and 
to undergo a chemical change in the body is Class B. 
 
Note: for this rule a medical device to be placed in the teeth 
includes a device that is intended to penetrate a tooth but 
does not enter the gum or bone beyond the tooth. 
Examples: dentine adhesives. 
8 (n) Implantable orthopaedic components of joint 
replacements and maxilla facial implants – Class C 
Examples: components of implantable joint replacements 
such as screws, nails, wedges & plates (without a 
bioactive coating) for orthopaedic use; Maxilla-facial 
implants; posts to secure teeth to the mandibular bone 
(without a bioactive coating) and bone cement (without 
an antibiotic).  
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 22 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
4.5 
Classification of active medical devices 
This flowchart is a summary of the classification rules for active Medical Devices 
 
*NOTE: Rule 10(i) also includes a device that is intended to emit ionising radiation and to be used for diagnostic 
or therapeutic interventional radiology; or a device that is intended to be used to control or monitor, or directly 
influence, the performance of a device that emits ionising radiation and used for diagnostic or therapeutic 
interventional radiology. 
“Active medical device” means any medical device of which the operation depends on a source of electrical 
energy or any source of power other than that directly generated by the human body or gravity and which acts 
by converting this to energy but excluding medical devices intended to transmit energy, substances or other 
elements between an active medical device and the user, without any significant change in the energy, 
substance or other element being transmitted. 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 23 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
RULE 9: active medical devices for therapy 
Active medical device for therapy means an active medical device that is intended by the manufacturer to 
be used either alone or in combination with another medical device, to support, modify, replace or restore 
biological functions or structures for the purpose of treating or alleviating an illness, injury or disability. 
This rule covers devices that are electrical equipment used in surgery, devices used in specialized 
treatments and stimulation devices. 
Rule 9 
Description 
9 (i) (a) An active medical device for therapy to administer 
energy to a patient, or exchange energy to or from a 
patient—Class B. 
Examples: 
electrical—magnetic and electromagnetic energy muscle 
stimulators, external bone growth stimulators, TENS 
devices, electrical acupuncture; 
 
thermal 
energy—cryosurgery 
equipment, 
heat 
exchangers; 
 
mechanical energy—powered dermatomes, drills and 
dental hand pieces; 
 
light—phototherapy for skin treatment and for neonatal 
care; 
 
sound—hearing aids. 
9 (i) (b) An active device to administer or exchange energy 
in a potentially hazardous way, having regard to the 
nature, density and site of application of the energy—
Class C. 
 
(The term “potentially hazardous” refers to the type of 
technology involved and the intended application) 
Examples: 
kinetic energy—lung ventilators; 
 
thermal energy—infant incubators, warming blankets for 
unconscious patients, blood warmers, heat exchangers 
used in intensive care; 
 
electrical 
energy—high-frequency 
electrosurgical 
generators, 
electrocautery, 
external 
defibrillators, 
electroconvulsive therapy equipment; 
 
coherent light—surgical lasers; 
 
ultrasound—lithotriptors, physiotherapy ultrasound 
devices; 
 
ionising radiation—radioactive sources for after- loading 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 24 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 9 
Description 
therapy, therapeutic cyclotrons, linear accelerators, 
therapeutic X-ray sources. 
 
 
9 (ii) An active device to control or monitor, or directly 
influence the performance of an active medical device for 
therapy of the kind in the previous entry—Class C. 
Examples: 
external 
feedback 
systems 
for 
active 
therapeutic devices, after-loading control devices. 
 
RULE 10: Active medical devices for diagnosis 
Active medical device for diagnosis means an active medical device that is intended by the manufacturer 
to be used on a human, either alone or in combination with another medical device, to supply information 
for the purpose of detecting, diagnosing, monitoring or treating physiological conditions, states of health, 
illness or congenital deformities. 
This rule covers devices that are used in ultrasound diagnosis and capture of physiological signals and 
devices used in diagnostic radiology. 
*NOTE: Active devices for diagnosis are classified as Class A, in accordance with Rule 12, unless they are 
specifically covered by any of the clauses in Rules 9, 10 or 11. 
Rule 10 
Description 
10 (i) (a) A device to supply energy that will be absorbed by 
a patient’s body (except a device that illuminates the 
patient’s body in the visible spectrum)—Class B. 
Examples: magnetic resonance equipment, pulp testers, 
evoked response stimulators, diagnostic ultrasound. 
10 (i) (b) A device to be used to image in vivo distribution 
of radiopharmaceuticals in patients— Class B. 
Examples: 
gamma 
cameras, 
positron 
emission 
tomography, 
single 
photon 
emission 
computer 
tomography. 
10 (i) (c) A device used for direct diagnosis or monitoring of 
vital physiological processes of a patient, excluding devices 
mentioned in the previous entry—Class B. 
Examples: 
electrocardiographs, 
electroencephalographs, cardioscopes with or without 
pacing pulse indicators, electronic thermometers. 
10 (i) (d) A device to diagnose and or monitor vital 
physiological parameters of a patient, and the nature of 
variations monitored could result in immediate danger to 
the patient—Class C. 
Note: For this clause ‘variations monitored’, is taken to 
mean that the result of monitoring could lead to immediate 
danger to the patient. This is typically, but not always, 
accompanied by an alarm. 
Examples: intensive care monitoring systems, biological 
sensors, blood gas analysers used in open- heart 
surgery, cardioscopes and apnoea monitors including 
those in home care. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 25 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 10 
Description 
9 (ii) (a) A device to emit ionising radiation and to be used 
for diagnostic or therapeutic interventional radiology—
Class C. 
Examples: diagnostic x-ray sources, linear accelerators. 
10 (ii) (b) A device to control, monitor or directly influence 
the performance of a device in the previous entry—Class C. 
Examples: auto exposure control systems, 
radiotherapy after loading controls systems. 
 
RULE 11: Active medical devices intended to administer or remove medicines, body liquids or other 
substances from a patient’s body 
This rule covers drug delivery systems and anesthesia equipment. 
Rule 11 
Description 
11 (a) An active device to administer or remove medicine, 
body liquids or other substances—Class B. 
Examples: suction equipment, feeding pumps, jet 
injectors for vaccination. 
11 (b) An active device to administer or remove medicine, 
body liquids or other substances in a way that is potentially 
hazardous to the patient, having regard to the substances, 
the part of the body concerned, and the characteristics of 
the device— Class C. 
Examples: infusion pumps, ventilators, anesthesia 
machines, anesthetic vaporisers, dialysis equipment, 
blood pumps for heart-lung machines, hyperbaric 
chambers, pressure regulators for medical gases, 
medical gas mixers, moisture exchangers in breathing 
circuits, nebulisers where the failure to deliver the 
appropriate dosage form could be hazardous. 
 
RULE 12: Active Medical Devices – General 
This rule applies to active medical devices that are not covered by a specific rule. 
Rule 12 
Description 
An active device is Class A, unless the device is classified 
at a higher level under another rule. 
Examples: examination lights, surgical microscopes, 
diagnostic devices for thermography, active devices for 
recording, processing or viewing of diagnostic images, 
devices intended in general for external patient 
support (e.g. hospital beds, patient hoists, wheelchairs, 
dental patient chairs). 
 
Active diagnostic devices intended for thermography - 
Dental curing lights. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 26 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
4.6 
Additional Classification Rules 13, 14, 15 & 16 
This flowchart is a summary of the additional classification rules for Medical Devices 
 
RULE 13: Devices incorporating a medicine 
This rule covers medical devices that incorporate a medicinal substance including stable derivatives of 
human blood and blood plasma that assists the function of the device. 
Rule 13 
Description 
A device incorporating a substance that if used separately 
would be a medicine and has an ancillary action on the 
body—Class D. 
Examples: antibiotic bone cements, condoms with 
spermicide, 
heparin-coated 
catheters, 
dressings 
incorporating an antimicrobial agent where the purpose 
of such an agent is to provide ancillary action on the 
wound.  
 
Endodontic materials with antibiotics - Ophthalmic 
irrigation solutions principally intended for irrigation, 
which contain components which support the 
metabolism of the endothelial cells of the cornea - 
Dressings incorporating an antimicrobial agent where 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 27 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 13 
Description 
the purpose of such an agent is to provide ancillary 
action on the wound,  
 
Contraceptive intrauterine devices (IUDs) containing 
copper or silver, 
 
Drug eluting stents, e.g. coronary, pulmonary 
 
RULE 14: devices containing animal or human cells / tissues or derivatives, or microbial or recombinant 
tissues, cells or substances. 
This rule covers devices that contain or are made of animal tissues that have been rendered non-viable or 
derivatives from such tissues also being non-viable, or microbial or recombinant tissues, cells or substances. 
Rule 14 
Description 
14 (a) Devices that contain animal or human cells or tissues 
or derivatives, whether viable or that have been rendered 
non-viable, are Class D. 
 
Devices that contain tissues, cells or substances of microbial 
or recombinant origin are Class D, even if the device is only 
intended to come into contact with intact skin. 
Examples: biological heart valves, porcine xenograft 
dressings, catgut sutures, implants, dressings made 
from collagen. Devices utilising hyaluronic acid of 
animal origin 
Examples: intra-ocular fluids, meniscule joint fluid 
replacement, anti-adhesion barriers, tissue fillers 
based on hyaluronic acid derived from bacterial 
fermentation processes. 
14 (b) Devices that only contains animal tissues that have 
been rendered non-viable and the device is only intended 
by the manufacturer to come into contact with intact skin – 
Class A 
Examples: leather straps associated with limb 
prostheses. 
 
RULE 15: devices intended for sterilising, disinfecting, cleaning, rinsing etc. 
This rule covers various contact lens fluids and substances or equipment to disinfect another medical 
device. It does not cover devices that clean by a physical action only. 
Rule 15 
Description 
15 (a) A device specifically for sterilising medical devices, or 
disinfecting as the end point of processing - Class C. 
Examples: hard contact lens solutions, comfort 
solutions. 
15 (b) A device intended for disinfecting medical devices 
prior to end point sterilization or higher-level disinfection – 
Class B 
Disinfectants specifically intended for non-invasive 
medical devices and equipment such as sterilizers 
specifically intended to sterilize medical devices in a 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 28 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Rule 15 
Description 
medical 
environment 
and 
washer 
disinfectors; 
Washers-disinfectors 
intended 
specifically 
for 
disinfecting non-invasive medical devices. 
15 (c) A device specifically for disinfecting, cleaning, rinsing 
or, when appropriate, hydrating contact lenses - Class C. 
Note: this clause does not apply to a medical device that is 
intended only to clean another medical device (other than 
contact lenses) by means of physical action—these devices 
are Class A. 
Denture disinfecting products; Washers-disinfectors for 
endoscopes; Disinfectants for the fluid pathways of 
haemodialysis equipment; Disinfectants for ocular 
prosthesis, intraosseous transcutaneous amputation 
prosthesis, surgical equipment and invasive dental 
equipment 
 
RULE 16: Devices for contraception or prevention of sexually transmitted diseases 
Some devices covered by this technical rule may perform both functions, for example, condoms. 
Rule 16 
Description 
16 (a) A device for contraception or the prevention of 
sexually transmitted diseases – Class C. 
Examples: condoms, contraceptive diaphragms. 
16 (b) An implantable or invasive device for long- term use 
– Class D. 
Examples: contraceptive intrauterine devices (IUDs), 
surgically implanted contraceptive devices. 
 
4.7 
Other classification examples 
The following examples are provided to demonstrate the importance of considering all the classification 
rules for a medical device to ensure that the medical device is appropriately classified. The examples will 
not include all the possible medical devices that may be on the market - they are intended to demonstrate 
how different variables affect the classification of a medical device. There may be several classification rules 
that apply to a medical device - if this happens the higher classification applies. 
Warming Blanket 
Intended purpose: To re-warm patients who are cold (hypothermic or recovering post-surgery). These 
patients may be unconscious. 
Description 
Variable/comments 
Classification Rule 
Classification 
A large piece of fabric material 
blanket specially designed to keep a 
person warm and/or to prevent the 
Not powered 
Rule 1 
Class A 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 29 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Description 
Variable/comments 
Classification Rule 
Classification 
further loss of body heat, often in 
an emergency. 
Blanket used to blow warm air onto 
patient 
in 
hypothermia, 
post- 
surgery (person unable to regulate 
own body temperature) 
Electrically powered 
Potentially hazardous as patient may get 
burned or overheated; may have 
peripheral neuropathy (so not able to 
feel the intensity of the heat), may not 
be able to indicate if the blanket is too 
hot 
(e.g. 
neonates, 
unconscious 
patients). 
 
If a patient’s blood pressure is critically 
low when the therapy is first applied, the 
applied heat may be detrimental to 
maintaining adequate blood pressure, as 
resulting vasodilation reduces blood 
pressure 
Rule 9 (i) (b) 
Class C 
 
Nebuliser 
Intended purpose: To deliver particles of medication/ moisture (typically bronchodilators such as 
salbutamol) to the airways and lungs. 
Description 
Variable/ Comments 
Classification Rule 
Classification 
A 
compressor 
that 
pumps 
compressed air through the fluid to 
be 
nebulised, 
thus 
forming 
droplets/vapour and carrying this 
into the airways during inspiration 
Electrically powered 
Rule 9 (i) (a) 
Class B 
A fast-track nebuliser is able to 
nebulise more fluid per minute, and 
with finer droplets that reach more 
deeply into the lungs 
Electrically 
powered—delivers 
medication in a more potent form than 
a 
standard 
nebuliser 
and 
the 
administration of medicine at an 
incorrect rate can be life threatening 
Rule 9 (i) (b) 
Class C 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 30 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Dressings 
Intended purpose: To be applied to a wound in order to promote healing and/or prevent further harm. 
Description 
Variable/ Comments 
Classification Rule Classification 
Adhesive dressing strip—not sterile 
Not sterile 
Rule 1 (a) 
Class A 
Adhesive dressing strip—sterile 
Sterile 
Rule 1 (b) 
Class B 
Adhesive dressing strip—with silver 
Has silver (microbial agent) to assist 
in healing. The silver is a medicine 
Rule 13 
Class D 
Compression bandage used for 
sprains 
Used for compression to assist in 
injury management 
Rule 1 (a) 
Class A 
A wound dressing for deep wounds 
and ulcers that have breached the 
dermis containing alginate to absorb 
exudate 
Contains alginate of microbial origin 
Rule 14 
Class D 
A wound dressing for deep wounds 
and ulcers that have breached the 
dermis containing alginate to absorb 
exudate 
Contains alginate of non- microbial 
origin. Heals by secondary intent 
Rule 1 (c) 
Class C 
A 
wound 
dressing 
including 
materials of biological origin, such as 
collagen, 
sodium 
hyaluronate, 
chondroitin sulphate 
Contains materials of biological 
origin 
Rule 14 
Class D 
A non-sterile, trauma covering used 
to maintain the stability of a burn 
patient en route to a hospital. 
Dressing is coated in a gel containing 
anaesthetic 
Contains medicine 
Rule 13 
Class D 
A non-sterile, trauma covering used 
to maintain the stability of a full 
thickness burn patient en route to a 
hospital. Dressing is coated in a gel 
that does not contain any active 
medicine ingredients 
Breached the dermis. Does not 
contain medicine 
Rule 1 (c) 
Class C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 31 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Fixation Screws 
Intended purpose: To hold plates or nails to bone, fasten soft tissue to bone or provide interfragmentary 
stabilisation for bone. 
Description 
Variable/ Comments 
Classification Rule Classification 
Metal fixation screw; permanent 
implant 
Permanently implanted 
Rule 8 (n) 
Class C 
Metal fixation screw—used to hold 
bone together for up to 30 days (for 
example, to support healing of a 
fracture) 
Short-term use 
Rule 7 
Class B 
Metal fixation screw—used to hold 
bone together temporarily during 
surgery 
Transient use 
Rule 6 
Class B 
Absorbable 
fixation 
screw; 
permanent implant, absorbed into 
body 
Will be absorbed into body 
Rule 8 (i) 
Class D 
Fixation screw that has direct 
contact with central circulatory or 
central nervous systems 
Location in body - direct contact with 
high-risk areas (central circulatory or 
central nervous systems). 
Rule 8 (c) 
Class D 
 
4.8 
Classification of IVD medical devices 
4.8.1 
Overview  
The medical devices regulatory framework has a classification system for medical devices and IVDs, as per 
the regulations of Act 101 of 1965. 
A medical device, other than an IVD medical device, has the medical device classification applying under 
the classification rules set out in the Technical Rules for Classification of Medical Devices. 
An IVD medical device has the medical device classification applying under the classification rules set out in 
the Technical Rules for Classification of IVDs. 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 32 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
The classification levels for IVDs are: 
Classification 
Level of risk 
Class A 
no public health risk or low personal risk 
Class B 
low public health risk or moderate personal risk 
Class C 
moderate public health risk or high personal risk 
Class D 
high public health risk 
The same classification rules apply to both commercial IVDs and in-house IVDs. 
The manufacturer or distributor is responsible for determining the class of an IVD using the classification 
rules and having regard to: 
a)
the manufacturer's intended use of the device; and
b)
the level of risk to the patient and the public (taking into account the likelihood of harm and the
severity of that harm).
Identical devices may be classified differently if they are to be used for different diagnostic purposes. This 
is why the manufacturer's intended use of the device is critical to determining the appropriate class. The 
intended use can be obtained from the: 
a)
Information provided with the IVD (including Instructions for Use and labelling)
b)
Advertising materials
c)
Design dossier (if applicable).
NOTE: There may be medical devices or IVDs where the classification in South Africa is different to the 
classification in other countries. The manufacturer or distributor should take into account the South African 
requirements when determining the classification of a device that is to be supplied in South Africa. 
4.9 
Principles for application of the classification rules 
The classification rules are based on the manufacturer's intended purpose, taking into account the degree 
of risk involved to the patient and the public. The classification must be consistent with the information 
accompanying the IVD including the labels, Instructions for Use, brochures and operating manuals. If the 
intended purpose of the device is not clear, The Authority will request further clarification from the 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 33 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
manufacturer and may also consider the purpose generally accepted in clinical and laboratory practice. 
All the classification rules must be considered to determine the classification of the IVD. In some cases, 
more than one classification rule may be applicable to an IVD, but if this occurs the higher risk classification 
applies.  
There are exceptions to this principle, whereby a number of the classification rules state that despite certain 
other rules, a particular risk classification should always apply to a type of IVD. These include for example, 
Rule 5 which specifies that IVDs that are non-assay-specific quality control material are Class B IVDs. 
A number of IVDs are supplied with or are required to be used in combination with other IVDs, non-IVD 
medical devices or accessories to medical devices. The classification rules must be applied separately to 
each device.  
An accessory to an IVD is described as an item that its manufacturer specifically intends to be used together 
with an IVD, to enable that IVD to be used as intended. Accessories are classified independently of the IVD 
that they are to be used with. 
Materials that are intended to be used for the calibration or quality control of a particular named assay are 
considered to be part of a single assay with a common intended purpose. Therefore, they have the same 
risk classification as each of the other assay components based on the common intended purpose of the 
assay, even if these materials are sold separately. 
If one or more IVDs are supplied as part of a system or a procedure pack, the class for the entire pack is the 
highest class of any individual IVD in the pack. For example, if a procedure pack contains a selection of Class 
A, B and C IVDs, then the entire pack is classified as a Class C IVD. 
If a procedure pack contains a mixture of IVDs and non-IVD medical devices, the individual component of 
the highest Class will determine the overall classification of the procedure pack. The individual device of 
the highest Class will also determine if the procedure pack is to be included in the IVD Register as an IVD 
medical device or a non-IVD medical device. For example, a procedure pack contains a portable 
prothrombin time meter (Class A IVD), test strips or cartridges for prothrombin time self-testing (Class C 
IVD), and a lancet (Class B medical device) for obtaining a blood specimen. The procedure pack would take 
on the highest classification assigned to any individual component, namely Class C IVD, and is required to 
be included in the IVD Register as an IVD medical device.  
When an IVD and a medical device within a procedure pack are of the same classification level (equivalent 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 34 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
risk class) the primary intended purpose of the device is to be considered to determine whether the pack 
is included on the Register as an IVD or a medical device. Where components of a procedure pack are also 
supplied separately, they need to be separately included in the Register E.g. Medical devices such as lancets. 
In the event of a dispute resulting from application of the classification rules, The Authority shall determine 
the classification: 
Software: 
a) that fits the definition of a medical device is also an active medical device since it relies on an energy 
source for its operation 
b) that is intended to make a device operate, control a device, or influence the functions of a device 
generally falls in the same classification as the device 
c) intended as an accessory to a medical device should be classified separately from the device with 
which it is used 
d) is considered an accessory when it is not essential to the operation of the device. 
4.10 Classification rules for IVDs 
4.10.1 
Classification Rule 1 - Detection of transmissible agents posing a high public health risk 
An IVD medical device intended to be used for any of the following purposes is classified as a Class D IVD 
medical device: 
a) to detect the presence of, or exposure to, transmissible agents in blood, blood components, blood 
products, cells, tissues or organs or any derivatives of these products of human or animal origin, in 
order to assess their suitability for transfusion or transplantation; and 
b) to detect the presence of, or exposure to, a transmissible agent that causes a serious disease with a 
high risk of propagation. 
4.10.2 
Classification Rule 2 - Detection of red blood cell antigens and antibodies and non-red cell 
typing 
a) An IVD medical device is classified as a Class C IVD medical device if: 
− 
The device is intended to be used for detection of biological markers in order to assess the 
immunological compatibility of blood, blood components, blood products, cells, tissues or 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 35 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
organs that are intended for transfusion or transplantation; and 
− 
The device is not one of the devices mentioned in subclause (2). 
b) An IVD medical device intended to detect the following markers is classified as a Class D IVD medical 
device: 
− 
ABO system - ABO1 (A), ABO2 (B), ABO3 (AB); 
− 
Rhesus system - RH1 (D), RH2 (C), RH3 (E), RH4 (c), RH5 (e); 
− 
Kell system - KEL1 (K); 
− 
Kidd system - JK1 (Jka), JK2 (Jkb); and 
− 
Duffy system - FY1 (Fya), FY2 (Fyb). 
4.10.3 
Classification Rule 3 - Detection of transmissible agents or biological characteristics posing a 
moderate public health risk or a high personal risk 
a) An IVD is classified as Class C IVD medical devices if it is intended for any of the following uses: 
− 
detecting the presence of, or exposure to, a sexually transmitted agent; 
− 
detecting the presence in cerebrospinal fluid or blood of an infectious agent with a risk of limited 
propagation. 
− 
detecting the presence of an infectious agent where there is a significant risk that an erroneous 
result would cause death or severe disability to the individual or foetus being tested. 
− 
pre-natal screening of women in order to determine their immune status towards transmissible 
agents. 
− 
determining infective disease status or immune status where there is a risk that an erroneous 
result will lead to a patient management decision resulting in an imminent life- threatening 
situation for the patient. 
− 
the selection of patients. 
 
for selective therapy and management; or 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 36 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
 
for disease staging; or 
 
in the diagnosis of cancer; 
− 
human genetic testing; 
− 
to monitor levels of medicines, substances or biological components, when there is a risk that 
an erroneous result will lead to a patient management decision resulting in an immediate life-
threatening situation for the patient; 
− 
the management of patients suffering from a life-threatening infectious disease; 
− 
screening for congenital disorders in the foetus. 
NOTE: For paragraph (f) an IVD medical device would fall into Class B under clause 3.3.5 if: 
− 
a therapy decision would usually be made only after further investigation; or 
− 
the device is used for monitoring. 
a) Despite subsection (1) an IVD is classified as a Class C IVD medical device if it is used to test for 
transmissible agents included in the list of Notifiable conditions as published from time to time. 
 
4.10.4 
Classification Rule 4 - IVD medical devices for self-testing 
An IVD medical device for self-testing is classified as a Class C IVD medical device unless: 
a) the result of the examination is not determining a serious condition, ailment, or defect; or 
b) the examination is preliminary and follow-up additional testing is required. 
4.10.5 
Classification Rule 5 - Non-assay specific quality control material 
Despite rules 1 to 4, an IVD medical device that is intended to be used as non-assay specific quality control 
material is classified as a Class B IVD medical device. 
4.10.6 
Classification Rule 6 - Reagents, instruments etc. 
a) A reagent or other article that possesses specific characteristics, intended by the manufacturer, to 
make it suitable for in vitro diagnostic procedures related to a specific examination is classified as a 
Class A IVD medical devices. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 37 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
b) Despite rules 1 to 5, the following IVD medical devices are classified as Class A IVD medical devices: 
− 
an instrument, intended by the manufacturer, specifically to be used for in vitro diagnostic 
procedures; 
− 
a specimen receptacle; 
− 
a microbiological culture medium. 
In this clause: 
“examination” means a set of operations having the object of determining the value or characteristics of a 
property. 
NOTE 1: In some disciplines (for example, microbiology) an examination is the combination of a number of 
tests, observations or measurements. 
“specimen receptacle” means a device, whether vacuum-type or not, specifically intended by its 
manufacturer for the primary containment and preservation of a specimen derived from the human body 
for the purpose of in vitro diagnostic examination. 
NOTE 2: A specimen receptacle is considered to be an in vitro diagnostic device. 
NOTE 3: A product for general laboratory use is not an in vitro diagnostic medical device unless the product, 
in view of its characteristics, is specifically intended by its manufacturer to be used for in vitro diagnostic 
examination. 
4.10.7 
Classification Rule 7 - Other IVDs are Class B IVD medical devices 
An IVD medical device not mentioned in rules 1 to 7 is classified as a Class B IVD medical device. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 38 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
4.10.8 
IVD Classification Flow Chart 
 
4.11 Rationale and examples for classification rules for IVDs 
4.11.1 
Classification Rule 1 - Detection of transmissible agents posing a high public health risk 
Rationale: 
Devices captured by this rule pose a high public health risk. 
Rule 1 is presented in two parts - paragraph 1 (a) describes IVDs that are used to establish the safety of 
blood and blood components for transfusion, or cells, tissues and organs for transplantation. In most cases, 
the result of the test is a major determinant as to whether the donation or product will be used. 
Paragraph 1 (b) describes IVDs that are used to diagnose clinical infections that cause serious diseases with 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 39 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
a high risk of transmission from person to person in the population. 
Serious diseases are those: 
a) that may result in death or long-term disability; and 
b) that are often incurable or require major therapeutic interventions; and 
c) where an accurate diagnosis is of vital importance to mitigate the public health impact of the 
condition. 
Rule 1 applies to all assays used to determine suitability for transfusion or transplantation as part of the 
laboratory's infectious disease testing algorithm, and includes front-line or screening assays, confirmatory 
assays, supplemental assays, and IVDs that detect structural components or surrogate markers of 
transmissible agents that cause serious disease. 
Some IVDs are intended only to be used in a diagnostic setting but are identical to those intended to be 
used for screening blood and tissue donations. These IVDs may be classified according to other rules if Rule 
1 (b) does not also apply, provided the Sponsor can provide assurance that the IVD is marketed in 
accordance with the alternate classification. For example, a syphilis assay can be classified as a Class D IVD 
if it is intended to screen blood and tissue donations, but is a Class C IVD as per rule 3 (1) (a) if it is intended 
for diagnostic purposes only. 
Examples: 
All tests used by the Blood Service for testing of the blood supply are Class D IVDs, including screening and 
confirmatory assays for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), Hepatitis B virus, 
HTLV I/II and syphilis. Any additional assays that are performed on a supplementary basis, such as those 
use to determine Cytomegalovirus status or suitability for Zoster immunoglobulin production, are also Class 
D IVDs. 
All tests used by hospital-based laboratories that screen for infectious disease markers to determine 
suitability for organ or tissue transplantation under the requirements of their licence are Class D IVDs, 
including screening and confirmatory assays for HIV, HCV, Hepatitis B virus, HTLV I/II and syphilis. 
Pyrogenicity tests (endotoxin activity assays) marketed for detection of bacterial contamination of blood 
components are Class D IVDs if the result of the test is a determinant as to whether or not the product will 
be used. By contrast, if the test is used for quality control purposes to measure the rate of contamination 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 40 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
in a sample of products as part of the manufacturing process, then the test would be considered a 
manufacturing step and not an IVD. 
All assays for the clinical diagnosis of infection by HIV 1 & 2, Hepatitis C virus, Hepatitis B virus and HTLV I/II 
are Class D IVDs. Assays for the clinical diagnosis of Hepatitis B virus are taken to include the following 
infectious disease markers: Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), Hepatitis B core IgM antibodies (anti-
HBcore IgM), Hepatitis B core total antibodies (anti-HBcore tot) and Hepatitis B virus nucleic acid detection 
(HBV NAT). 
Tests for detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), highly virulent 
pandemic influenza, Variola virus (Smallpox virus) and viral haemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola virus or 
Marburg virus are Class D IVDs. 
4.11.2 
Classification Rule 2 - Detection of red blood cell antigens and antibodies and non-red cell 
typing 
Rationale: 
Devices captured by this rule present a high individual risk, where an erroneous result would put the patient 
in an imminent life-threatening situation. 
Classification rule 2 divides blood grouping IVDs into two subsets depending on the nature of the blood 
group antigen the IVD is designed to detect, and its importance in a transfusion setting. Essentially, all IVDs 
for testing for antigens or antibodies for any of the red blood cell markers not specifically mentioned in Rule 
2 (2), and all IVDs used in tissue typing to test for human leukocyte antigens and antibodies, are Class C 
IVDs. The red blood cell markers captured by rule 2 (2) are critical to ensuring safe transfusion of blood and 
blood components, or transplantation of cells, tissues and organs, and are Class D IVDs. 
Examples: 
IVDs for testing for red blood cell antigens or antibodies from Blood Group A, Blood Group B, or Blood 
Group AB, within the ABO blood group system are Class D IVDs. 
IVDs for testing for red blood cell antigens or antibodies for Cw or V from the Rhesus system; Cellano (k) 
from the Kell blood group system; or any markers from MNS or Cartwright blood group systems are Class C 
IVDs. 
All IVDs used in tissue typing, to detect antigens and antibodies for any human leukocyte antigens are Class 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 41 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
C IVDs. 
4.11.3 
Classification Rule 3 - Detection of transmissible agents or biological characteristics posing a 
moderate public health risk or a high personal risk 
Rationale: 
IVDs captured by this rule present a moderate public health risk or a high individual risk, where an 
erroneous result could lead to a patient management decision resulting in a significant impact on patient 
outcome. These IVDs usually provide the critical or sole determinant for correct diagnosis. 
The Department of Health publishes a list of diseases that are required to be notified nationally. A case 
definition is provided for each disease or disease group and a number of the case definitions rely on 
laboratory definitive evidence, laboratory suggestive evidence, clinical evidence (probable cases), or a 
combination of various markers to be present to require their notification. Contribution to the diagnosis of 
a particular disease through the results of testing for any of the markers mentioned as either suggestive or 
definitive evidence, are taken to be Class C IVDs. Where information presented in the Instructions for Use 
for a particular assay represents that an additional marker (beyond those specified in the case definitions) 
may also be used to diagnose a notifiable disease, these too are taken to be Class C IVDs. 
IVDs that are used to detect the presence of, or exposure to, sexually transmitted agents are Class C IVDs. 
Tests for HIV, HCV and Hepatitis B virus and Tuberculosis, which are regarded as serious diseases (and are 
therefore Class D IVDs), 
Examples: 
Tests to detect the presence or exposure to a sexually transmitted agent such as C. trachomatis or N. 
gonorrhoea are Class C IVDs. Antibodies to C. trachomatis may be used to indicate either current or previous 
infection and therefore are also regarded as a Class C IVD under Rule 3 (1) (a). Tests for the detection of 
Chlamydia species to the genus level and for Chlamydia pneumoniae only are not captured by this rule and 
would be regarded as Class B IVDs. 
IVDs used to detect in cerebrospinal fluid or blood, the presence of an infectious agent that has a risk of 
limited propagation include the following as Class C IVDs:  tests for the direct detection of N. gonorrhoea 
or Cryptococcus neoformans antigens; tests for the detection of Haemophilus influenza type B (Hib) antigen; 
tests for the detection of IgM antibodies to malaria parasites. 
Tests that are used to detect the presence of an infectious agent, whereby an erroneous result would cause 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 42 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
death or severe disability to the individual or foetus being tested are Class C IVDs. This includes tests for 
emerging serious diseases such as Hendra virus, or tests to confirm the presence or identity of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), either directly from a clinical specimen or from a cultured isolate 
(note that microbiological culture media is a Class A IVD under Rule 7). This rule also applies to other serious 
infectious diseases such as prion diseases or malaria. 
Prenatal screening tests include a number of different analytes which together generate a testing profile 
for infections that may cause illness in pregnant women, and birth defects or serious infections in 
newborns. These tests are sometimes collectively referred to as a TORCH screen and are regarded as Class 
C IVDs. Tests usually include detection of antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii, Rubella virus, Cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), Herpes simplex virus 1 & 2, Measles virus and Treponema pallidum. 
Tests that are used to select patients for selective therapy and management are Class C IVDs and include 
viral genotyping assays to establish a suitable course of therapy, or Her2/neu testing to select patients with 
breast cancer for treatment using the drug Herceptin. 
Tests for tumour markers such as free prostate specific antigen (free PSA), or tests where results are 
expressed as a percentage or ratio against total PSA for use in differentiating between benign or malignant 
tumours are Class C IVDs. 
Rule 3 (f) includes a note which describes tests where a therapy decision is only made after further 
investigation, or that are used for monitoring. Tests intended to be used for initial screening, such as a 
faecal occult blood screening test (FOBT) for bowel cancer, require further investigation if a positive result 
is obtained; and tests used only for monitoring disease status, such as a total PSA which may aid in the 
management of a prostate cancer patient are regarded as Class B IVDs under Rule 7. 
Pharmacogenetic tests to predict metabolism of warfarin, or tests for other cytochrome P450 oxidative 
enzymes which may be used to gauge the metabolism rate of drugs are Class C IVDs. 
All tests used for human genetic testing are Class C IVDs, for example tests for detecting the Philadelphia 
chromosome, Huntington's disease or cystic fibrosis. 
Tests for therapeutic monitoring of immunosuppressive medicines such as cyclosporin and tacrolimus are 
Class C IVDs, due to the impact of an erroneous result on a patient and the potential for adverse 
transplantation outcome. Other tests for monitoring substances or biological components that are 
regarded as Class C IVDs include acute cardiac markers such as Troponin I, Troponin T and CKMB. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 43 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Class C IVDs used for the management of life-threatening infectious disease include viral load and 
genotyping assays for HIV and Hepatitis C virus. 
Class C IVDs used for screening for congenital disorders include pre- and post-natal tests for trisomy 13, 
trisomy 18, trisomy 21 or Klinefelter's syndrome; tests for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) when used in the 
detection of foetal open neural tube defects. 
Software that is supplied as a "stand-alone" IVD, for use in the interpretation of a series of results obtained 
as part of a first trimester screening assessment, in order to determine foetal risk of trisomy 21 is a Class C 
IVD.  
Software that is supplied as a "stand-alone" IVD, for use in staging or predicting severity of disease by means 
of an algorithm based on a combination of anthropometric measures and non-invasive biomarkers is a Class 
C IVD. 
4.11.4 
Classification Rule 4 - IVD medical devices for self-testing 
Rationale: 
Self-testing IVDs are intended to be used by individuals with no scientific or technical expertise, or formal 
training in a medical field or discipline to which the test relates. Self-test devices can pose a low, moderate 
or high personal risk and can therefore fall into Class A, Class B or Class C IVD. 
The definition of IVD medical device for self-testing includes IVDs intended for use in the collection of a 
sample by a lay person and, if the sample is tested by another person (e.g. a laboratory) the results are 
returned directly to the person from whom the sample was taken without the direct supervision of a health 
professional who has formal training in a medical field or discipline to which the test relates. The Authority 
interprets 'direct supervision' to mean written or verbal communication from a health professional who is 
personally treating the person and therefore has already established a professional relationship with their 
client, or verbal communication with the person by a health professional who is able to explain the 
significance of the test and answer questions that the person may have regarding the interpretation of the 
result. This applies regardless of the nature of the result, e.g., positive, negative, quantitative value. 
Rule 4 classifies IVDs for self-testing as Class C IVDs if the condition, ailment or defect to which the test 
relates is generally considered to be: 
a) inappropriate to be diagnosed or treated without consulting a health professional 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 44 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
b) beyond the ability of the average person to evaluate accurately, or be treated for safely without 
adequate supervision. 
In situations where use of the self-test does not determine a serious condition, or the result is purely 
preliminary, other classification rules apply. For example, a positive result from a pregnancy self-test kit will 
generally be followed up with a visit to the user's medical practitioner therefore a pregnancy self- test kit 
is not regarded as a Class C IVD, rather it is classified as a Class B IVD using rule 7. 
Examples: 
System for self-monitoring of blood glucose - Class C IVD. Each of the individual components of a self-testing 
blood glucose monitoring system is classified individually, with the highest overall class applying to the 
system. So a glucose meter, as an instrument for in vitro diagnostic procedures, is classified as a Class A IVD 
as per rule 6, the glucose reagent test strips for use in self-testing are classified as Class C IVDs since an 
erroneous result obtained when self-testing for blood glucose may lead to a life-threatening situation and 
the lancet for obtaining a blood sample is classified as a Class B medical device. As a system intended for 
self-testing, a glucose meter, glucose reagent test strips and lancet would be classified as a Class C IVD. 
Urine self-test strips to detect glucose and other general urine chemistry analytes - Class B IVD. 
Pregnancy and fertility self-testing kits - Class B IVD. 
4.11.5 
Classification Rule 5 - Non-assay specific quality control material 
Rationale: 
Devices in this class pose a low public health risk or moderate personal risk. 
Quality control material is taken to be controls, calibrators and standards, and as a subset of this, non-assay 
specific quality control materials are those that are not assigned for use with a specific assay. 
This rule does not apply to quality control materials that are assigned for use with a specific assay, or where 
the manufacturer of the quality control material has provided detailed information (e.g. references ranges) 
relating to a particular assay - these are taken to be the same risk class as the parent assay based on the 
common intended purpose, even if they are sold separately. 
Examples: 
Non-assay specific control plasmas for use in coagulation studies. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 45 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Non-assay specific control serum containing multiple biochemical analytes. 
Non-assay specific control serum, for use as an independent control for HCV antibody assays. 
A DNA or RNA probe supplied for use as a non-assay specific control for in situ hybridisation of targeted 
gene polymorphisms. Although an ISH probe is intended for use in human genetic testing and could 
therefore be regarded as a Class C IVD, under rule 5 despite any other classification rule, non-assay specific 
quality control material is a Class B IVD. 
4.11.6 
Classification Rule 6 - Reagents, instruments etc. 
Rationale: 
Devices captured by this rule present a low individual risk and minimal or no public health risk. 
Products for general laboratory use are not IVD medical devices unless such products, in view of their 
characteristics, are specifically intended by their manufacturer to be used for in vitro diagnostic 
examination. For example, pipettes, test tubes and general consumables which are not specifically intended 
by the manufacturer to be used to perform a particular test are not considered IVD medical devices. 
Stains are generally considered to be IVDs if they are intended by the manufacturer to be for a diagnostic 
purpose. Single staining solutions for diagnostic use are classified as Class A IVDs under rule 6 (1) only if 
they are supplied separately and without instructions on how to perform a particular staining procedure, 
because they are regarded as general-purpose reagents. If staining solutions are supplied either individually 
or as a kit, together with instructions linking that stain to a particular staining process, the staining solution 
or kit must be classified according to the overall intended purpose of the stain. 
Stain powders or base ingredients used to prepare stains for use in a diagnostic setting are not considered 
to be IVDs because they are not finished products. However, once a powder or base ingredients have been 
made into a stain by a laboratory, the finished staining solution/s would be regarded as an IVD and an 
appropriate risk classification applied according to the overall intended purpose of the stain. 
Due to their interdependence, an instrument or software that is specifically required to be used to perform 
a particular test will be assessed at the same time as the test kit even though the instrument itself is 
classified as Class A IVD. 
Examples: 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 46 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Grams iodine solution which is individually supplied by a manufacturer without specific instructions for use 
in a Gram staining procedure is a Class A IVD because it may be used in multiple disciplines (e.g. clinical 
microbiology, histology, cytology). 
− 
Conversely, a foetal cell staining kit, supplied with instructions for performing a Kleihauer stain 
to identify candidates required to receive more than one dose of anti-D immunoglobulin is a 
Class B IVD under rule 7. A ready-to-use Romanowski staining kit supplied for use in haematology 
for staining peripheral blood sme-rs to perform white cell differentiation and evaluation of red 
cell morphology is also a Class B IVD under rule 7. 
A separately supplied reagent labelled as intended for use with a specific microbial identification testing 
kit, in order to determine the biochemical identification of a clinical isolate is a Class B IVD, in line with the 
classification of the microbial identification IVD, e.g. 3 % hydrogen peroxide for use in a catalase test or 
tetra methyl-p-phenylenediamine (TMPD) for use in an oxidase test. Conversely, a general reagent labelled 
simply as 3 % hydrogen peroxide or TMPD, which is not manufactured and supplied specifically for in vitro 
diagnostic use, is not considered to be an IVD. 
Microscope counting chambers such as hemocytometers and chambered urinalysis slides labelled as being 
intended for the microscopic examination of urine and other body fluids are Class A IVDs because they are 
suitable for use across multiple disciplines or in several different diagnostic applications. 
Plain ground-glass microscope slides, although intended for an application related to microscopic analysis, 
are not generally intended to be used expressly as an IVD medical device. 
Except for specimen containers intended for use in self testing, evacuated or non-evacuated blood 
collection tubes, and specimen containers intended for the collection of urine, faeces, cell or tissue 
specimens for subsequent in vitro examination are Class A IVDs. General laboratory tubes that are used to 
contain reactions or to contain and store processed specimens are not considered to be specimen 
receptacles. 
Manual, automated or semi-automated instruments such as an enzyme immunoassay analyzer, an ESR 
analyzer, or a thermal cycler for performing nucleic acid amplification in a clinical specimen are Class A IVDs. 
General laboratory equipment such as water baths, centrifuges, balances and automatic pipettes are not 
considered to be IVDs unless they are specifically intended by the manufacturer (in product labelling or 
accompanying literature) to be used for an in vitro diagnostic examination e.g. blood bank tube centrifuge 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 47 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
for spinning of blood grouping reactions. 
Prepared (ready to use) microbiological culture media, including agar containing selecting agents, 
antimicrobials, chromogenic agents or chemical indicators for colony differentiation are Class A IVDs.  
Dehydrated powders and agar bases are not considered to be IVDs. 
Class A IVD General Laboratory reagents are those that are suitable for use across multiple disciplines or a 
broad range of different purposes. Standard buffers (e.g. PBS) and saline solutions are not considered to be 
an IVD unless supplied specifically for use as an IVD. 
Non-assay specific instrument consumable reagents are considered to be Class A IVDs. For example, a wash 
solution for use on instrument XYZ. The wash solution is not specific to a particular analyte, however it is 
specified for use on instrument XYZ. 
When a separately supplied reagent is intended for use in determining a specific analyte or parameter, or 
it is for use with a particular IVD, or it has a clearly defined purpose relating to its use with a group of similar 
or closely related tests, the reagent will be classified according to the class of the analyte or parameter it is 
intended to be used with. For example, a diluent or lyse solution intended for use when performing a full 
blood count (FBC) will be classified according to the class of the FBC assay, that is, a Class B IVD; a kit or 
individually supplied reagents intended to be used for the in-situ hybridisation of targeted gene 
polymorphisms, are classified under rule 3 as Class C IVDs for human genetic testing. 
A non-assay specific bacterial or viral RNA nucleic acid extraction kit intended for the extraction of 
pathogenic nucleic acid from a clinical specimen is a Class B IVD; a kit with a similar intended purpose of 
non-assay specific bacterial or viral RNA extraction, but which is dedicated for use on a specific instrument 
would be a Class A IVD. 
4.11.7 
Classification Rule 7 - Other IVDs are Class B IVD medical devices 
Rationale 
Devices captured by this rule present a moderate individual risk or a low public health risk. An erroneous 
result is unlikely to have a significant negative impact on patient outcome. The devices captured by this rule 
rarely provide the sole determinant for the correct diagnosis. If it is the sole determinant other information 
is available such as presenting signs and symptoms or clinical information, which may guide the physician. 
This class also includes IVDs that detect infectious agents that are not easily propagated in a population. 
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 48 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
Examples: 
Most biochemistry tests for blood gases, hormones, vitamins, enzymes, metabolic markers and substrates 
are Class B IVDs. 
IVDs for performing coagulation testing are generally regarded as Class B IVDs, including activated partial 
thromboplastin time (APTT), factor assays and prothrombin time testing (other than prothrombin time for 
self-testing, which is captured as a Class C IVD by rule 4). 
Biochemical tests for establishing the presumptive identification of microbiological culture isolates, or for 
determining antimicrobial susceptibility of microbiological culture isolates, are Class B IVDs; however, 
confirmatory identification or serotyping reagents for microbiological culture isolates are classified 
according to the analyte being detected, e.g. Salmonella poly-O antisera or Haemophilus influenza serotype 
b typing reagent are Class C IVDs 
Cell culture lines for the culture of viruses present in clinical specimens are Class B IVDs. 
Tests to detect infection by Helicobacter pylori, Clostridium difficile, Adenovirus, Rotavirus and Giardia 
lamblia are Class B IVDs. 
Pregnancy tests for self-testing are Class B IVDs. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
The following related documents are referenced: 
5.1 
SAHPGL-MD-06 Guideline for a licence to manufacture, import, export or distribute medical devices and 
IVDs. 
5.2 
SAHPGL-MD-01 MEDICAL DEVICES and IVDs ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES of SAFETY & PERFORMANCE  
5.3 
GHTF/SG1/N044:2008 Role of Standards in the Assessment of Medical Devices. 
5.4 
IMDRF/GRRP WG/N47: Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices and IVD 
Medical    Devices 
5.5 
WHO Global Model Regulatory Framework for Devices including in vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices – 
WHO Medical Device Technical series  
SAHPGL-MD-04_v5 
Page 49 of 49
Guideline for Classification of Medical Devices and IVDS 
27 February 2025 
 
 
5.6 
ISO 14971 Medical Devices – Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices 
5.7 
ISO 13485 Medical Devices – Quality Management Systems – Requirements for Regulatory Purposes 
6. 
VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces the previous 
revision (i.e. version 04). It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when required. 
