SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 1 of 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 2025 
GUIDELINE FOR ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADRs) REPORTING FOR 
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS 
This document has been prepared to serve as a guideline for healthcare professionals reporting adverse drug reactions 
and product quality problems. It represents the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority’s (SAHPRA)’s current 
thinking on the safety, quality and efficacy of medicines. It is not intended as an exclusive approach. SAHPRA reserves 
the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality, and efficacy of medicines and may make 
amendments in keeping with the current knowledge at the time of consideration of safety data. 
 
Guidelines and ADR Reporting & Quality Problem Forms are available from the SAHPRA website. The ADR Reporting 
Form is also available as Appendix A of this document. 
 
Document History 
Version
Reason for Amendment
Effective Date
 
0 
First publication released for comments 
April – August 2020 
0 
Change in Table below the title, Table of contents, Abbreviations and 
Acronyms, 1, 1.1, 1.2, 2, 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.6,   2.9, 
2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.25, 
2.26, 2.28, 2.30, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.39, 3.1, 3.2,   Table 
1, Diagrams 1 and 2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 6, 7 Diagram 3 
and the addition of the AEFI definition. 
December 2020 
1 
Date for implementation 
May 2021 
2 
Template review 
Addition of ‘Validity’ of the guideline 
August 2022 
3 
Deletion of reference to adverse events following immunisation (AEFI) 
and inclusion of reporting timelines for serious and non-serious adverse 
drug reactions 
September 2022 
4 
 
Addition under Abbreviations, addition of 4.3.1; 4.3.2 
 
Updated ADR reporting form, sections 3.2 and 4.7, Table 1 
 
Replaced 4.6.4 with 4.6.4, removed 4.6.4 
30 June 2025 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 2 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
Contents 
Document History ........................................................................................................................ 1 
Glossary....................................................................................................................................... 4 
Abbreviations and Acronyms ...................................................................................................... 11 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 12 
1.1 
The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) ............................ 12 
2. 
The Pharmacovigilance obligation of the healthcare professional ........................................ 12 
3. 
PHARMACOVIGILANCE ....................................................................................................... 13 
3.1 
Why is pharmacovigilance and reporting of ADRs important? .................................... 13 
3.2 
Pharmacovigilance System in South Africa ................................................................. 13 
4. 
PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING ............................................................................................ 16 
4.1 
How do healthcare professionals/providers identify ADRs? ........................................ 16 
4.1.1 
Obtain patient history and perform an appropriate examination ................................ 16 
4.1.2 
Effect of dechallenge and rechallenge should be determined (when necessary) .......... 16 
4.1.3 
Where possible, check the known pharmacology of the medicine .............................. 16 
4.2 
What to report? ....................................................................................................... 17 
4.3 
When to report an ADR? ........................................................................................... 19 
4.3.1 Minimum information required .................................................................................... 19 
4.3.2 Reporting timelines ...................................................................................................... 19 
4.4 
Information to consider when reporting? .................................................................. 19 
4.4.1 
What to consider? .................................................................................................... 19 
4.4.2 
Follow-up reports ..................................................................................................... 21 
4.5 
Who should report ADRs? ......................................................................................... 21 
4.6 
How to report? ......................................................................................................... 21 
4.6.1 
Med Safety App ........................................................................................................ 21 
4.6.2 
Using eReporting link to VigiFlow® ............................................................................ 23 
4.6.3 
Adverse Drug Reactions & Quality Problem Reporting Form ....................................... 23 
4.7 
What happens after reporting? ................................................................................. 23 
5. 
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE REPORTER? ................................................................................... 25 
5.1 
Will reporting have any negative consequences on the healthcare professional or the 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 3 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
patient? ................................................................................................................... 25 
5.2 
Confidentiality ......................................................................................................... 25 
6. 
VALIDITY ............................................................................................................................ 25 
7. 
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................... 26 
8. 
 APPENDICES ...................................................................................................................... 28 
APPENDIX A: ADR REPORTING FORM..................................................................................... 28 
APPENDIX B: MED SAFETY APPLICATION ................................................................................ 30 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 4 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
Term
Meaning
Adverse 
Drug 
Reaction 
(ADR) or Adverse Reaction 
An adverse drug reaction (ADR) means a noxious and unintended response to a 
medicine, including lack of efficacy, and which occurs at doses commonly used in 
man and which can also result from overdose, misuse or abuse of a medicine. 
The reaction may be a known side effect of the medicine, or it may be new and 
previously unrecognised. An ADR can be caused by any therapeutic agent, 
including prescribed and over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. All such adverse 
effects should be reported. 
 
A reaction, contrary to an event, is characterised by the occurrence of a 
suspected causal relationship between the medicine and the reaction, as 
determined by the reporter or a reviewing healthcare professional/provider. The 
fact that the healthcare professional/provider is making a report serves as an 
indication that the observed event may be caused by the medicine. 
Adverse Event 
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence that may present during 
treatment with a medicine, but which does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with this treatment. An adverse event can be any unfavourable and 
unintended sign, symptom or disease temporarily associated with the use of a 
medicine, whether considered related to the medicine or not. 
Adverse Effect 
An adverse effect is a harmful patient outcome that seems to be associated with 
treatment, including the absence of any effect. 
Causality assessment
Causality assessment is defined as the evaluation of the likelihood that a 
medicine was the causative agent of an observed adverse drug reaction. 
Congenital Anomalies
Congenital anomalies are defined as structural and/or functional abnormalities, 
usually irreversible, that develop/occur during the period of conception and/or 
embryo-foetal development during one or more trimesters of pregnancy, 
affecting one or more of the following domains: genetic material, histology, 
anatomy, organ system, development, growth, differentiation, physiological 
function and/or metabolic function and/or homeostatic mechanisms which may 
be identifiable either prenatally and/or at birth or later in life. Congenital 
anomalies are also known as birth defects, congenital disorders, congenital 
defects or congenital malformations. 
Consumer 
A consumer in relation to healthcare means a person who uses or is a potential 
user of health services, as well as their family and caregivers. 
Counterfeit or falsified 
medicines 
Counterfeit or falsified medicine means a medicine in respect of which deliberate 
false representation has been made about its contents, identity or source by any 
means, including its labelling and packaging. 
Substandard medicines 
Substandard medical products are those that fail to meet quality standards and 
specifications, typically due to poor manufacturing practices or inadequate 
Glossary 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 5 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
quality control.  
Clinical Trial
A study is performed to investigate the safety or efficacy of a medicine. For 
human medicines, these studies are conducted with human participants. 
Drug overdose
A drug overdose is the accidental or intentional use of a drug or medicine in an 
amount that is higher than is usually used. 
Dechallenge 
Dechallenge means a withdrawal /reduction in the dose of a medicine from the 
patient's therapeutic regimen. 
Negative dechallenge means the continued presence of an adverse experience 
after withdrawal of the medicine. 
Positive dechallenge refers to the partial or complete disappearance of an 
adverse event after the withdrawal of the medicine. 
eReporting 
eReporting is a module of the VigiFlow® system that allows for seamless 
electronic reporting of an individual case safety report (ICSR) directly from the 
source into the VigiFlow® system. It reduces the workload of manual data entry 
from ADR paper forms into VigiFlow® system. 
Essential Medicines List 
(EML) Clinical Guide 
The EML Clinical Guide is a National Department of Health Mobile Application 
(App) that contains the Primary Healthcare Standard Treatment Guidelines, 
Hospital Level Adult Guidelines, Tertiary and Quaternary Level EML 
Recommendations, and the Essential Medicines List for 2015. It includes an ADR 
reporting module which is used to report ADRs. 
Healthcare 
Professional/Provider 
Healthcare professional or healthcare provider means a person providing health 
services in terms of any law, including in terms of the: 
 
Allied Health Professions Act, 1982 (Act No. 63 of 1982) 
 
Health Professions Act, 1982 (Act No. 56 of 1982) 
 
Nursing Act, 1978 (Act No. 50 of 1978); 
 
Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No. 53 of 1974) 
 
Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No. 19 of 1979) 
Hypothesis 
A hypothesis is an idea which is suggested as a possible explanation for a 
particular situation or condition, but which has not yet been proved to be correct.
Holder of a certificate of 
registration/applicant 
A holder of a certificate of registration is a person/company in whose name a 
registration certificate has been granted, and who is responsible for all aspects 
of the medicine, including quality, safety, effectiveness, and compliance with the 
conditions of registration. 
Individual 
Case 
Safety 
Report (ICSR) 
ICSR is a detailed record of all relevant data associated with the use of a medicine 
in a subject or patient. 
An individual case safety report is the information provided by a primary source 
to describe suspected adverse reactions or adverse events following 
immunisations related to the administration of one or more medicines to an 
individual patient at a particular point in time. 
In vitro diagnostic (IVD)
IVD means a medical device, whether used alone or in combination, intended by 
the manufacturer for the in vitro examination of specimens derived from the 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 6 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
human body solely or principally to provide information for diagnostic, 
monitoring or compatibility purposes. 
Lack of efficacy 
Lack of efficacy is defined as failure to produce the expected outcome for which 
the medicine was indicated. Lack of efficacy applies to registered medicines, 
including when used for an unapproved indication. 
Medical device 
Medical device means any instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 
appliance, implant, reagent for in vitro use, software, material or other similar or 
related article, including Group III and IV Hazardous Substances contemplated in 
the Hazardous Substances Act, 1973 (Act 15 of 1973) - intended by the 
manufacturer to be used, alone or in combination, for humans or animals, for 
one or more of the following: 
 
diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease; 
 
diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or compensation for an 
injury; 
 
investigation, replacement, modification or support of the anatomy or of 
a physiological process; 
 
supporting or sustaining life; 
 
control of conception; 
 
disinfection of medical devices; or 
 
providing information for medical or diagnostic purposes by means of in 
vitro examination of specimens derived from the human body; and 
 
which does not achieve its primary intended action by pharmacological, 
immunological or metabolic means, in or on human or animal body, but 
which may be assisted in its intended function by such means. 
Medication error
Medication error is any preventable event that may cause or lead to 
inappropriate medication use or patient harm while the medication is under the 
control of the healthcare professional, patient, or consumer. Such events may be 
related to professional practice, healthcare products, procedures, and systems, 
including: 
 
prescribing errors; 
 
dispensing errors; 
 
medicine preparation errors; 
 
administration errors and 
 
monitoring errors. 
Medication errors and medicine-related adverse events have important 
implications – from increased length of hospitalisation and costs to undue 
discomfort and disability or increased mortality. Thus, minimising of medication 
errors, through early detection and clinical audit, is of paramount importance in 
healthcare by promoting compliance, adherence, recovery and the general well-
being of patients. 
Medicine 
Means any substance or mixture of substances used or purporting to be suitable 
for use or manufactured or sold for use in - 
 
the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, modification or prevention of 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 7 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
disease, abnormal physical or mental state or the symptoms thereof in 
humans; or 
 
restoring, correcting or modifying any somatic, psychic or organic 
function in humans; and 
 
includes any veterinary medicine. 
Med Safety App 
The Med Safety App is a smartphone app for reporting of suspected ADRs to 
Regulatory Authorities, and it is developed by the United Kingdom Medicines and 
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (UK MHRA) as part of the Innovative 
Medicines Initiative WEB-Recognising Adverse Drug Reactions (WEB-RADR) 
project. 
Misuse of medicine 
Misuse of medicine is defined as the use of a medicine outside label directions 
or in a way other than prescribed or directed by a healthcare practitioner. This 
includes patients using a medicine for a different condition than that for which 
the medicine is prescribed, patients taking more medicines than prescribed or at 
different dosing intervals, and individuals using a drug not prescribed for them, 
although for therapeutic purposes. 
Minimum 
information 
required for a report 
It is information required for a case to be deemed meaningful for data capturing 
and it includes the following: 
 
information about the patient, 
 
which medicine is suspected to have caused the reaction, 
 
the reaction that has occurred, and 
 
information about the reporter. A report may be nullified if it lacks the 
minimum information. 
 
For further information required to ensure the report is clinical meaningful, see 
point 4.4.1. 
Pharmacovigilance 
Pharmacovigilance is defined as the science and activities concerned with the 
detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse reactions (and 
adverse events following immunisation) to medicines/vaccines. The ultimate 
goal of this activity is to improve the safe and rational use of medicines, thereby 
improving patient care and public health. 
Post-marketing 
surveillance 
Post-marketing surveillance is the practice of monitoring the safety of a 
medicine, medical device or IVD after it has been released on the market. It is a 
crucial aspect of the science of pharmacovigilance. Medicines are 
approved/authorised to be used by the public on the basis of clinical trials, which 
involve relatively small numbers of participants who have been selected for such 
purposes.  
Post-marketing surveillance is used to confirm or disprove the safety of a 
medicine after it is used in the general population by large numbers of people 
who have a wide variety of medical conditions, by using approaches such as 
spontaneous ADR reporting procedures, pregnancy registries, etc. 
Product Quality Problem 
Product quality problems include concerns about the quality, authenticity, 
performance, or safety of any medical device or IVD. Problems with product 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 8 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
quality may occur during manufacturing, distribution, or storage and include a 
suspect counterfeit product; product contamination; defective components; 
poor packaging or product mix-up; questionable stability; medical device 
malfunctions and labelling concerns. 
Rechallenge 
Rechallenge refers to the reintroduction of a product suspected of causing an 
adverse event after a successful dechallenge. 
Negative rechallenge means that, when reintroduced, the medicine fails to 
produce signs or symptoms similar to those observed when it was initially 
introduced. 
Positive rechallenge means reoccurrence of similar signs and symptoms upon 
reintroduction of a medicine. 
Serious 
Adverse 
Drug 
Event or Adverse Drug 
Reaction 
A serious adverse event or reaction is any untoward medical occurrence that at 
any dose: 
 
results in death; 
 
is life-threatening; 
 
requires 
patient 
hospitalisation 
or 
prolongation 
of 
existing 
hospitalisation; 
 
results in an abortion, premature delivery, congenital anomaly/birth 
defects; 
 
results in persistent or significant disability/incapability; or 
 
is a medically significant/ important event or reaction. 
 
The term “life-threatening” in the definition of “serious” refers to a 
reaction/event in which the patient was at risk of death at the time of the 
reaction/event; it does not refer to an event that, hypothetically, might have 
caused death if it were more severe. Medical and scientific judgement should be 
exercised when deciding whether other situations are serious or not. Such 
instances could include medical events that may not be immediately life-
threatening or result in death or hospitalisation, but which may jeopardise the 
patient or may require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the 
definition above. Examples include blood dyscrasias or convulsions not resulting 
in hospitalisation, or development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific 
event. This is not the same as “serious, which is based on patient/event outcome 
or action criteria. 
Signal
A signal refers to ‘reported information on a possible causal relationship between 
an adverse event and a medicine, the relationship being unknown or 
incompletely documented previously. Usually, more than a single report is 
required to generate a signal, depending upon the seriousness of the event and 
the quality of the information. 
Spontaneous ADR report 
A spontaneous report is a communication to a pharmaceutical company, 
regulatory authority or other organisation that describes a suspected ADR in a 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 9 of 30 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
patient given one or more medicines, and which does not derive from a study. 
Teratogen
A teratogen is any substance/agent (e.g. medicine) that can harm/damage the 
sperm, ovum, the conceptus, developing embryo and/or foetus during one or 
more trimesters of pregnancy, affecting structure and/or function across one or 
more of the following domains: genetic material, histology, anatomy, organ 
system development, growth and differentiation, physiological function and/or 
metabolic function and/or homeostatic mechanisms which may be detectable 
prenatally, at birth or later in life. 
Unlisted adverse reaction 
An adverse reaction that is not included explicitly as a suspected adverse effect 
in the professional information (previously known as package insert) or other 
scientific reference. This includes an adverse reaction whose nature, severity, 
specificity or outcome is not consistent with the information in the professional 
information or other scientific reference. 
Uppsala Monitoring Centre 
(UMC) 
UMC is the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring. UMC 
works by collecting, assessing, and communicating information from member 
countries' national pharmacovigilance centres concerning the benefits, harm, 
effectiveness, and risks of medicines. UMC is responsible for: 
 
co-ordination of WHO Programme for International Drug Monitoring and 
its member countries; 
 
collection, assessment and communication of information from member 
countries about the benefits, harms and risks of medicines and other 
substances used in medicines to improve patient therapy and public 
health worldwide; 
 
collaborating with member countries in the development and practice of 
the science of pharmacovigilance. 
VigiAccess® 
VigiAccess® is a web application that allows the public to access VigiBase® 
database and retrieve statistical data on the suspected ADRs to medicines 
reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) Programme for International 
Drug Monitoring (PIDM). 
VigiBase® 
VigiBase® is the WHO global database of individual case safety reports (ICSRs). It 
is developed and maintained by the Uppsala Monitoring Centre (UMC) on behalf 
of WHO and its member countries. It consists of reports of ADRs to medicines 
received from member countries since 1968. It is updated with incoming case 
reports continuously. The purpose is to ensure that early signs of previously 
unknown medicine-related safety problems are identified as rapidly as possible. 
Contrary to VigiAccess®, consumers and healthcare professionals/providers do 
not have access to VigiBase® database. 
VigiFlow® 
VigiFlow® is a web-based ICSR management system that is available for use by 
national pharmacovigilance centres, e.g. SAHPRA, used by the WHO Programme 
for International Drug Monitoring. VigiFlow® supports the collection, processing 
and sharing of data of ICSRs to facilitate effective data analysis. 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 10 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
 
Vigilance 
Vigilance in relation to a medicine, medical device, or IVD means the continuous 
monitoring and evaluation of its safety, efficacy, and performance profile, as well 
as the management of any risks throughout its life cycle. 
VigiLyze
VigiLyze® is the search and analysis tool used to retrieve global ICSR data from 
VigiBase® database. Consumers and healthcare professionals/providers do not 
have access to this tool. 
Web-Recognising Adverse 
Drug 
Reactions 
(WEB-
RADR) project 
Web-RADR project, launched in September 2014, sought to utilise the powers of 
social media and new technologies for pharmacovigilance purposes. The project 
developed mobile applications (apps) enabling patients, caregivers, and 
healthcare professionals/providers to report ADRs and receive up-to-date 
information and news alerts. 
World Health Organisation 
(WHO) 
Programme 
for 
International 
Drug 
Monitoring (PIDM) 
The PIDM was established in 1968, to ensure that evidence about harm to 
patients was collected from as many sources as possible. This would enable 
individual countries to be alerted to patterns of harm that were emerging across 
the world, and which might not be evident from their local data alone. The PIDM 
consists of a group of more than 150 member countries (South Africa became a 
member in 1992) that share the vision of safer and more effective use of 
medicines. They work nationally and collaborate internationally to monitor and 
identify the harm caused by medicines, to reduce the risks to patients and to 
establish worldwide pharmacovigilance standards and systems. UMC has been 
responsible for the technical and operational aspects of the programme since 
1978. 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 11 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
ADRs 
Adverse Drug Reactions 
AIDS 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
DHCPLs 
Dear Healthcare Professional Letters 
DoH-PvPHP 
Department of Health Pharmacovigilance Centre for Public Health Programmes  
DRC 
Directorate of Radiation Control 
DTC 
Drug and Therapeutic Committee 
EML 
Essential Medicines List 
EPI 
Extended Programme for Immunisation 
HCR 
Holder of Certificate of Registration 
HCP 
HealthCare Professional 
HIV 
Human Immunodeficiency virus 
ICSR 
Individual Case Safety Report 
IVD 
In vitro diagnostics 
NADEMC 
National Adverse Drug Event Monitoring Centre 
MCC 
Medicines Control Council 
NSAIDs 
Non-Steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs 
OTC 
Over the counter 
PHP 
Public Health Programmes 
PI
Professional Information
PIDM
Programme for International Drug Monitoring
SAHPRA
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
TB
Tuberculosis
UMC
Uppsala Monitoring Centre
WEB-RADR
WEB-Recognising Adverse Drug Reactions 
WHO
World Health Organisation
 
For the purpose of this guideline: 
1 
the terms “holder of certificate of registration” and “applicant” are used interchangeably. 
2 
the terms “medicine”, “drug”, “therapeutic agent” and “causative agent” are also used 
interchangeably. 
3 
the terms “pharmaceutical product”, “health product” and “product” are also used 
interchangeably. 
4 
the terms “adverse drug reaction”, “reaction” and “adverse event” are used interchangeably. 
5 
the terms “Authority” and “South African Health Products Regulatory Authority” are used 
interchangeably. 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 12 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This guideline is intended to assist healthcare professionals/providers in the participation in the very 
important process of continuous surveillance of safety and efficacy of the medicines, which are used 
in their clinical practice. Continuous evaluation of a medicine’s benefit and harm helps achieve the 
ultimate goal of providing safe and effective treatments to patients. 
The guideline is intended to assist healthcare professionals/providers in the reporting of suspected 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and product quality issues associated with the use of medicines. 
 
1.1 
The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) 
This SAHPRA is a Section 3A public entity formed by the South African government to oversee the 
regulation of all health products, including medicines, medical devices, in vitro diagnostics (IVDs), and 
radiation-emitting products used in healthcare and industry. SAHPRA replaced the Medicines Control 
Council (MCC) and the Directorate of Radiation Control (DRC). 
The Medicines and Related Substances Act mandate SAHPRA, 1965 (Act No. 101 of 1965) as 
amended, to regulate (i.e., monitor, evaluate, investigate, inspect, register and review) all health 
products and their use in South Africa. 
SAHPRA has also been delegated the task of overseeing radiation control in South Africa. This 
function is governed by the Hazardous Substances Act (Act 15 of 1973) which aims to protect the 
public (workers, patients, etc.) against radiation used in both health settings and industry. 
SAHPRA’s function is therefore to promote public health and safety by ensuring that all medicines, 
medical devices, and IVDs available and used in South Africa are safe, effective, of good quality, and 
of acceptable performance. 
 
2. The Pharmacovigilance obligation of the healthcare professional 
According to Regulation 40 of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) as 
amended: A healthcare professional /provider, veterinarian or any other person should inform the 
Authority, in the manner as determined by the Authority, of any: 
 
suspected ADRs; or 
 
new or existing safety, quality or effectiveness concerns, occurring as a result of the use of 
any medicine or scheduled substance. 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 13 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
 
3. PHARMACOVIGILANCE 
3.1 
Why is pharmacovigilance and reporting of ADRs important? 
When a health product is first registered and made available in South Africa, information about its 
safety and effectiveness is usually only available from clinical trials. Clinical trials, through different 
test phases, provide information about many of the possible adverse events associated with a health 
product, but do not detect all possible adverse events because they: 
• 
usually do not continue for long enough to detect adverse events that take a long time 
to develop, 
• 
do not include enough patients to detect adverse events that occur rarely and 
• 
do not include all of the different types of people who might eventually use the product 
and who might be more vulnerable to some adverse events, such as older people, 
children, pregnant women or people with other medical conditions. 
Rare ADRs, occurring in only a small percentage of cases, after a long period of use or when a 
medicine interacts with a particular combination of other medicines or conditions, may not be 
detected during clinical trials. For ADRs that were not discovered during clinical trials to be detected, 
investigated, and communicated, and for the appropriate action to be taken, it is therefore vital that 
post-marketing pharmacovigilance of all medicines is comprehensive. Effective pharmacovigilance 
should take into account trends in use, as well as the occurrence of ADRs, enabling more effective 
advice to be given to those prescribing and using medicines and should ensure better standards of 
safety and efﬁcacy. 
SAHPRA, like other Regulatory Authorities around the world, monitors the safety of health products 
to contribute to a better understanding of their potential adverse events when used outside the 
controlled conditions of clinical trials. Continuous reporting by health professionals/providers and 
consumers provides important information for the pharmacovigilance system in South Africa. 
 
3.2 
Pharmacovigilance System in South Africa 
To prevent undesirable effects in patients resulting from substandard health products and the 
inappropriate or unsafe use of health products, an ADR monitoring system was established in South 
Africa in 1987. The regulatory pharmacovigilance unit of SAHPRA coordinates this system. The 
regulatory pharmacovigilance unit works in collaboration with programmatic units based at the 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 14 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
National Department of Health (NDoH) head office in Pretoria. The programmatic units are: 
• 
the Extended Programme on Immunisation (EPI) unit 
• 
the Department of Health Pharmacovigilance Centre for Public Health Programmes (DoH-
PvPHP). 
Table 1: Overarching Pharmacovigilance Bodies 
 
Characteristic
Regulatory
Public Health 
Manufacturer/HCR
Focal Point
SAHPRA 
DoH-PvPHP
EPI
Company Pharmacovigilance 
Programme 
Medicines under 
focus 
All medicines available in 
the country 
HIV/AIDS and 
TB medicines 
Vaccin
es 
All medicines registered or 
authorised for marketing by 
the particular company. 
Objectives
Ensure marketed 
medicines are safe, 
effective and of good 
quality in the interest of 
the public. 
Minimise preventable harm 
and maintain public trust in 
the programmes and the 
medicines it employs 
Ensure that marketed 
medicines are safe, effective, 
and of good quality, as per the 
product conditions of 
registration. Minimise 
preventable harm and maintain 
public safety with the 
medicines marketed. 
Communication of
 results and 
corrective actions 
Through regulatory 
decision-making, market 
withdrawal, labelling 
changes, Public Health 
Advisories, Dear 
Healthcare Professional 
Letters (DHCPLs) Press 
Statements and 
medicines safety alerts 
Epidemiological 
newsletters, press 
statements, guidelines, 
training and educational 
materials, local or 
international publications, 
infrastructural changes 
and changes in conditions 
of drug use 
Through reporting to the 
Authority, 
decision-
making, labelling and 
professional information 
changes, market 
withdrawal, dear healthcare 
professional letters (DHCPLs), 
guidelines, training and 
educational materials, local or 
international publications. 
Developed by Dr Ushma Mehta 
The regulatory pharmacovigilance unit’s key role is safety monitoring of all 
medicines available in the South African market. Its core activity is the 
collection and evaluation of ADR reports submitted by healthcare 
professionals/providers, consumers, and HCRs in the country. The ultimate 
goal of this activity is to contribute to the rational and safe use of medicines 
and to continuously monitor the risks and benefits of all medicines available 
at every level of healthcare. Ensuring safety of medicines is the responsibility 
of all stakeholders involved in the medicines chain. 
The diagram below illustrates the various stakeholders involved in 
pharmacovigilance and their respective key responsibilities. 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 15 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
PEOPLE 
FUNCTIONS 
 
Diagram 1: Professional groups/associations and their functions 
 
STRUCTURES
 Reporters 

Doctors  

Pharmacists  

Nurses 

Consumers/ Patients 

Other healthcare 
workers 
Manufacturers
Licence
holdersDistributors & 
 
Data Collation and Evaluation

Collate data, conduct initial analysis 
Causality Analysis and Risk Determination

Assess causal association between product and 
event and determine whether and what type of 
additional information is required to improve 
certainty of causal association. 

Assess risk through epidemiological studies. 

Pharmacovigilance
Center 

Drug & Therapeutics 
Committee (DTC) 

Pharmacy 

Therapeutics 
Committee (PTC) 
 
Decision Making and Appropriate Action
Professional 
information 
amendments, 
warnings, 
scheduling 
changes, 
risk 
management, 
market 
withdrawal, and product recall, etc. 
Reporting (Detection and Generation) 

Report side effects and suspected adverse events
Evaluators

Regulatory 
Authorities  
& 

Pharmaceutical 
Industries - i.e., HCRs

Regulatory Authority  

Industry 

Health Services  

Professional Groups  

Advisory 
Committees 

Media 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 16 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
 
4. PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING 
4.1 How do healthcare professionals/providers identify ADRs? 
4.1.1 
Obtain patient history and perform an appropriate examination 
i) 
Take a proper history 
• 
A full medical history should be appropriately performed. 
• 
Can this ADR be explained by other causes, e.g., the patient’s underlying disease, other 
prescription medicine/s or OTC medicines, toxins or foods? 
• 
It is essential that the patient is thoroughly investigated to establish the actual cause of any new 
medical problem. A medicine-related cause should be considered, especially when other causes 
do not explain the patient’s condition. 
ii) 
Where necessary, perform a thorough physical examination with appropriate laboratory, imaging and 
other relevant investigations, 
• 
Few medicines produce distinctive physical signs (exceptions include fixed drug eruptions, 
steroid-induced dermal atrophy, and acute extrapyramidal reactions). 
• 
Laboratory tests are critical if the medicine is considered essential in improving patient care or if 
the laboratory test results will improve management of the patient. 
• 
Describe the reaction as clearly as possible. Where possible, provide an accurate diagnosis and/or 
supply pictures. 
In summary, some reactions occur immediately after a medicine is administered, while other responses take 
time to develop. Thus, the time from the start of therapy to the time of onset of the suspected reaction must 
be logical. 
4.1.2 
Effect of dechallenge and rechallenge should be determined (when necessary) 
• 
Positive dechallenge (partial or complete disappearance of a reaction when dechallenge is 
instituted) is a strong, although not conclusive, indication of a medicine-induced reaction. 
• 
Rechallenge (reintroducing the medicine after a dechallenge) is justifiable when the benefit of 
reintroducing the medicine to the patient outweighs the risk of recurrence of the reaction. This is 
rare. In some cases, the reaction may be more severe on repeat exposure. 
4.1.3 
Where possible, check the known pharmacology of the medicine 
• 
Is the reaction known to occur with the particular medicine as stated in the Professional 
Information (PI)/ medicine labelling or other scientific reference? 
• 
If the reaction is not documented in the PI, it does not mean that the reaction cannot occur with 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 17 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
that particular medicine. 
4.2 What to report? 
ADRs resulting from prescription medicines or OTC medicines should be reported. All ADRs should be reported. 
Most importantly, serious, undocumented and unexpected ADRs are to be reported. If there is any doubt 
about whether the ADR should be reported, it is always best practice to submit a report, as causality does not 
need to have been established. 
i) 
ADRs in children 
All suspected ADRs occurring in children under the age of 18 should be reported regardless of whether the 
medicine is registered for use in children. 
ii) 
ADRs in the elderly 
Healthcare professionals/providers should be particularly aware that the elderly may be more susceptible to 
ADRs. It is therefore important to monitor drug safety in this age group. Elderly patients are more likely to be 
taking multiple medicines and may also metabolise them less effectively or be more sensitive to their effects. 
iii) 
ADR reports on lack of efficacy 
Lack of efficacy for medicines used in the treatment of life-threatening diseases (e.g., antimicrobial agents), 
vaccines, contraceptives or other classes of medicines where lack of efficacy could result in serious 
consequences, requires reporting. The normal progression of disease does not imply a lack of efficacy. The 
batch/lot number of the suspected medicine for a report of lack of efficacy must be included in the report. 
iv) 
Delayed drug effects 
Some reactions may become manifest months or years after exposure. Any suspicion of such an association 
should always be reported. Examples of delayed reactions that might need to be reported include: 
• 
kidney disease from long-term usage of analgesics or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); 
• 
disabling and potentially permanent side effects which involve tendons, muscles, joints, nerves and 
the central nervous system (i.e., tendonitis, tendon rupture, arthralgia, pain in extremities, gait 
disturbance, neuropathies associated with paraesthesia, depression, fatigue, memory impairment, 
sleep disorders, and impaired hearing, vision, taste and smell) following the use of fluoroquinolone 
antibiotics. 
v) 
Interactions 
If an adverse effect is suspected to be related to an interaction between two or more medicines, it should be 
reported as an ADR. 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 18 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
vi) 
Medication errors 
Medication errors, whether resulting in an adverse drug reaction or not, should be reported. 
vii) 
Overdose 
Suspected ADRs associated with an overdose should be reported, as well as other reactions that may have 
occurred due to the overdose. 
viii) 
Reports relating to pregnancy and breastfeeding 
The healthcare professional/provider should report suspected ADRs related to pregnancy or breastfeeding 
regardless of whether the medicine is contraindicated in pregnancy and/or lactation. 
ix) 
Serious adverse drug reactions 
All serious suspected reactions should be reported within seven calendar days of identification, while non-
serious ADRs should be reported within 15 calendar days. The side effects of an established medicine may be 
well known but if a severe reaction occurs it should always be reported regardless of whether it is expected 
or not. 
x) 
Product quality problem 
Healthcare professionals/providers are encouraged to report product quality problems, whether or not they 
result in an adverse drug reaction. The batch/lot number of the suspected medicines must be included in the 
report. 
xi) 
Teratogenicity and congenital anomalies 
The following information should be provided for reports on congenital anomalies or teratogenicity: 
• 
age and sex of the infant, 
• 
the birth date or the date on which the pregnancy was ended; (duration of pregnancy/gestational age 
of foetus/baby), 
• 
date and/or duration of exposure to teratogen/substance/medicine in the preconception period, 
and/or any or all trimesters of pregnancy, 
• 
the teratogen/substance(s) or medicine(s) exposed to and the dose in case of a medicine and reason(s) 
for exposure or treatment with the medicine(s), 
• 
the type of congenital anomaly/malformation/adverse event/ reaction noticed at or after birth, and 
the seriousness thereof, 
• 
whether the congenital anomaly/malformation/adverse event/reaction resulted in death, was life-
threatening, required hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation, was a medically 
significant/important 
reaction/event 
or 
would 
have 
persistent 
and/or 
significant 
disability/incapability consequences, and 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 19 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
• 
any adverse reactions experienced by the mother must be considered a new initial case report and 
should be reported separately. 
Suspected ADRs should also be reported in cases where a baby is born with a congenital abnormality or where 
a pregnancy results in a malformed or aborted foetus. The report should include details of all medicines taken 
during pregnancy. 
 
4.3 When to report an ADR? 
A healthcare professional/provider should report when they have identified an ADR suspected to have been 
caused by a medicine. Healthcare professionals/providers are encouraged to report suspected ADRs even 
when they do not have all the facts or are uncertain that the medicine is definitely responsible for causing the 
reaction.  
4.3.1 Minimum information required  
Healthcare professionals should note that even if all the facts are not available at the time of reporting, the 
minimum information required for a meaningful case (i.e., information about the patient, suspected medicine, 
the reaction and information about the reporter) should always be included in the report. However, it is 
important that healthcare professionals/providers make every effort to ensure that all facts are included in 
the report to provide a meaningful assessment. 
4.3.2 Reporting timelines 
Serious adverse drug reactions should be reported within 24 hours of identification, while non-serious adverse 
drug reactions should be reported within 15 calendar days of identification. 
 
4.4 Information to consider when reporting? 
4.4.1 
What to consider? 
When completing the form, the healthcare professional/provider should include the minimum information 
required for a case to be deemed meaningful, which is as follows: 
• 
information about the patient: 
o patient’s initials, 
o local identiﬁcation/ reference number [any number or code that identiﬁes the patient to the 
reporter, but not to SAHPRA (e.g., hospital number; file number)], 
o gender, 
o age at the time of the ADR or date of birth and 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 20 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
o weight (if known), 
• 
which medicine is suspected to have caused the reaction, 
o 
name (preferably proprietary name), 
o dose, frequency and route used, 
o therapy date, 
o indication for use, 
o batch/lot number, 
o 
expiration date, 
• 
the reaction that has occurred, 
o description of the reaction, 
o onset date of the reaction, 
o outcome of the reaction after use of the medicine was stopped or reduced, 
o information about the reaction, in instances where there is repeat exposure of the medicine, 
• 
information about the reporter, 
o name or initials, email address and telephone number, 
o occupation, 
o health institution/facility. 
Further information that is required to ensure that the report is clinically meaningful is as follows, but is not 
limited to: 
• 
concomitant medicines, therapy dates, 
• 
other relevant patient information/ history, 
• 
date of the report and 
• 
relevant tests/laboratory data (if available). 
These are important points to note when reporting an ADR: 
• 
It should be noted that by supplying these anonymised details, a healthcare professional/provider will 
not breach the confidentiality agreement they have with the patient. Although explicit consent from 
the patient is not required, it is best practice to inform the patient if a report will be submitted. 
• 
Healthcare professionals/providers should submit ALL the relevant information available at the time 
of initial identification of an ADR, not only the minimum information required for a report. The 
attachment of discharge summaries, post-mortem reports, relevant laboratory data and other 
additional clinical data is encouraged. 
• 
Additional information, not available at the time of the initial report, should be provided when 
available, as a follow-up report (using the same reference number as the initial report). 
• 
The healthcare professional/provider who initially reported the suspected ADR is required to submit 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 21 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
their names or initials, institution, email address, telephone number and qualifications. 
 
4.4.2 
Follow-up reports 
Any follow-up information from the healthcare professional/provider relating to an initial ADR report 
submitted to SAHPRA, should be cross-referenced to the reference number (if applicable) on the initial report. 
The follow-up report, which follows a previous (first) communication to SAHPRA, should be clearly marked as 
a follow-up. This is the only reliable way to minimise duplication of reports submitted by reporters in the 
VigiFlow® system. 
4.5 Who should report ADRs? 
All healthcare professionals/providers, including doctors, dentists, pharmacists, nurses and other healthcare 
professionals/providers are requested to report all suspected adverse reactions severe ADRs and those related 
to new medicines. Consumers should be encouraged to report all suspected ADRs, preferably via their 
healthcare professionals/providers. 
 
4.6 How to report? 
All ADRs should be reported to SAHPRA’s Pharmacovigilance Unit through one of the channels stipulated 
below: 
 
4.6.1 
Med Safety App 
Med Safety App is a mobile application developed to engage both patients and healthcare providers on 
medicines safety issues. It was developed by the United Kingdom Medicines and Healthcare Products 
Regulatory Agency (UK MHRA) as part of the Innovative Medicines Initiative WEB-Recognising Adverse Drug 
Reactions (WEB-RADR) project. The app is designed to simplify and promote the reporting of suspected 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs), including adverse events following immunisation (AEFIs), by both the public 
and healthcare providers. The App also allows the public and healthcare providers to learn about medicine 
safety news from SAHPRA, thereby creating an awareness of medicines, their potential adverse effects and 
pharmacovigilance. The Medsafety app is currently the most preferred tool for reporting suspected AEFIs and 
ADRs. 
 
Where to find Med Safety app? 
The Med Safety App is available for download from: 
 
App store (For iOS devices) 
 
Google Play (For Android devices) 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v4 
Page 22 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
How to download the Med Safety app: 
 
Open the Play Store (Android) or the App Store (IOS) 
 
Search for Med Safety icon 
 
Tap the Med Safety icon 
 
Tap to install to download the App 
 
Tap Open 
 
Select a region, in this case South Africa. Sometimes it selects automatically depending on the 
settings you already have on your phone 
 
Click continue as guest or create an account 
 
Report ADRs and/or product quality problems 
Upon successful submission of the report, a message is displayed on the app to confirm submission, and an 
email acknowledgement is sent to the reporter. For more information about the Med Safety App, please visit 
the SAHPRA website, under the E-Services tab, there is more information, including the videos of how to use 
the app and recorded related trainings.  
 
Why use Med Safety app? 
 
The Medsafety app provides several benefits: 
 
The App facilitates reporting of ADRs by the public and healthcare practitioners. 
 
The app provides feedback to reporters on a platform that is readily available to reporters. 
 
Users can create a watch list which enables users to view information that is relevant to them by 
following products of interest. 
 
The user can change the language within the app, and the language is automatically adapted to 
the language to which the device is configured. 
 
Reports can be created and saved without an internet connection and submitted later when a 
connection becomes available.  
 
View and submit updates to previously submitted reports. 
 
See immediate acceptance of your reports. 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 23 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
 
 
  
4.6.2 
Using eReporting link to VigiFlow® 
 
Healthcare professionals (and consumers) can report ADR through the eReporting module (accessible 
from the SAHPRA website) directly into VigiFlow®. 
 
eReporting allows for seamless electronic reporting of ADR reports, thus reducing the workload of 
manual data entry from ADR paper forms into VigiFlow®. 
 
Pharmacovigilance unit personnel need only to enter a small amount of data, which allows more time 
for the pharmacovigilance team to verify the coding and to conduct causality assessment of cases of 
interest. 
4.6.3 Adverse Drug Reactions & Quality Problem Reporting Form 
ADR reports should be sent via email at adr@sahpra.org.za or to the relevant pharmaceutical company 
(contact details can be found on the outer packaging of the health product). 
4.7 What happens after reporting? 
Once an ADR report has been received: 
 
SAHPRA (Pharmacovigilance Unit) staff capture the information onto the VigiFlow® system in a 
structured format. 
 
In turn, the VigiFlow® system assigns a unique identification number. 
 
The captured information for each report is checked for quality and completeness before being sent 
to the global database known as VigiBase®, where it is confidentially stored. 
 
An acknowledgement letter (which quotes the unique identiﬁcation number assigned to the report 
and the local/reference number) is then sent to the reporter. Acknowledgement letters for reports 
that have been assessed to determine the causal link are prioritised. 
 
At any point during this process, the reporter may be asked by the SAHPRA Pharmacovigilance Unit to 
provide clariﬁcation or further information about the ADR report. SAHPRA’s Pharmacovigilance Unit 
personnel, using referenced data from other sources (e.g. case reports in the literature; pre- and post-
marketing clinical trials; epidemiological studies; record-linkage databases; data from other drug 
regulatory authorities), conduct preliminary causality assessments and prepare reports on ADR cases 
with emerging drug safety problems. The report reviews are then presented to the Pharmacovigilance 
Advisory Committee (PVC) and its sub-committee for expert advice in identifying the possible risk 
factors contributing to the reaction and causal association. 
When safety concerns are identiﬁed, the overall ADR proﬁle for the medicine is compared with the relevant 
therapeutic alternatives, and its beneﬁts in terms of efﬁcacy, the therapeutic indication, and target patient 
population(s). Again, the PVC advises the Authority on drug safety, enabling regulatory decisions to be made 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 24 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
on whether changes in the use of a medicine are necessary. The possible regulatory changes may include: 
 
product label change 
 
product withdrawal/suspension 
 
“Dear healthcare professional” letters (DHCPLs) 
 
press statements 
 
medicines safety alerts 
 
product restrictions (up-scheduling, limited packaging, limited prescribers) 
 
an educational programme 
Following consideration of the advice provided by the PVC, the Authority engages with industry to alert the 
HCRs about safety concerns related to their products and communicate regulatory decisions related to 
products implicated as suspect medicines to ADRs. 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 25 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
Diagram 1: Flow diagram: ADR Form Life cycle 
 
 
5. WHAT HAPPENS TO THE REPORTER? 
5.1 Will reporting have any negative consequences on the healthcare professional or the patient? 
The ADR report does not constitute an admission that the reporter or any other healthcare professional 
contributed to the ADR in any way. The details of the report will be stored confidentially in VigiBase® database. 
The names of the reporter or any other health professionals named on a report and the patient will be 
removed before any details about a specific ADR are used or communicated to others. The information 
obtained from the report will not be used for commercial purposes. The information is intended to enhance 
our understanding of safety in relation to the use of medicines in South Africa. 
5.2 Confidentiality 
SAHPRA will maintain strict confidentiality regarding the identities of the patient and the reporter. 
6.  VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of revision. It will be reviewed as and when 
required. 
 
 
ADR is suspected
ADR is reported
ADR is recorded
Information sharing
Acknowledgement letter
Regulatory decision
communicated 
Decision making
Data analysis
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 26 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
7. REFERENCES 
1. 
Board of Science of the British Medical Association. 2006. Reporting Adverse Drug Reactions. A Guide for 
Healthcare Professionals. BMA Report. 
2. 
C3i Solutions. An HCL Technologies Company. Challenges, Prechallenges, Dechallenges and Rechallenges.
https://www.c3isolutions.com/blog/challenges-prechallenges-dechallenges-and- rechallenges/ (Accessed on 
20 January 2020). 
3. 
"Front Pharmacol. 2018; 9: 1407. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2018.00315/full 
(Accessed on 18 September 2020). 
4. 
Guidance for Industry: Guideline for Post marketing Reporting of Adverse Drug Experiences. 
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/guideline-postmarketing- 
reporting-adverse-drug-experiences (Accessed on 28 January 2020). 
5. 
Guidelines to detect and report ADRs in Burundi Health System. 
6. 
Guidelines 
for 
the 
National 
PV 
System 
in. 
Kenya 
developed- 
ver 
2.0 
(2009). 
https://www.who.int/hiv/topics/pharmacovigilance/kenya.pdf?ua=1 (Accessed 06 January 2021). 
7. 
Management Sciences for Health. 2012. MDS-3: Managing Access to Medicines and Health Technologies. 
Arlington, VA: Management Sciences for Health. 
8. 
Medicines Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965) as amended. 
9. 
National Health Act 61 of 2003. 
10. NSW Health Consumers. 2019. Consumers Toolkit. NSW. http://hcnsw.org.au/consumers-toolkit/who-is- 
health-consumer-and-other-definitions (Accessed on 20 January 2020). 
11. Post-Marketing Reporting of Adverse Drug Reactions to Human Medicines in South Africa. Version 6. 
https://www.sahpra.org.za/wp- 
content/uploads/2020/03/2.33_ADR_reporting_postmarketing_v6_Jan2020.pdf (Accessed on 20 January 
2020). 
12. Smith, Shannon M et al. “Classification and definition of misuse, abuse, and related events in clinical trials: 
ACTTION systematic review and recommendations.” Pain 
vol. 154, 
11 
(2013): 2287-96. 
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2013.05.053. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5460151 (Accessed on 
11 December 2020). 
13. The 
Theory 
and 
Definitions 
of 
Drug 
Safety 
— 
Pharmacovigilance. 
https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/pdf/10.1142/9789813278851_0001 (Accessed on 20 January 2020). 
14. The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union. (EMEA) 2008. Volume 9A. Guidelines on 
Pharmacovigilance for Medicinal Products for Human Use.  
15. Uppsala Monitoring Centre. 2019. Global Pharmacovigilance. Glossary of Pharmacovigilance Terms. 
https://www.who-umc.org/global-pharmacovigilance/publications/glossary/. (Accessed on 28 January 
2020). 
16. UMC 
– 
Med 
Safety 
App: 
An 
International 
Mobile 
Tool 
for 
Drug 
Safety. 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 27 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
https://allaboutpharmacovigilance.org/umc-med-safety-app-an-international-mobile-tool-for-drug-
safety/ (Accessed 05 February 2021, Updated 06 July 2020). 
17. Uppsala Reports – Covering The World of Pharmacovigilance. Med Safety App: An International Mobile Tool 
for Drug Safety https://www.uppsalareports.org/articles/med-safety-app-an-international-mobile-tool-
for- drug-safety/ (Accessed on 05 February 2021). 
18. WEB-RADR: Recognising Adverse Drug Reactions. Working together to improve pharmacovigilance through 
new technology. https://web-radr.eu/(Accessed on 05 February 2021). 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 28 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
8.  APPENDICES 
APPENDIX A: ADR REPORTING FORM 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
Page 29 of 30
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 30
SAHPGL-CEM-PV-06_v2 
ADRs REPORTING BY HCPs 
June 2025 
 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: MED SAFETY APPLICATION 
 
Other reporting tools available at SAHPRA include:  
Med Safety Application 
The Med Safety Application is a mobile application designed for the public and healthcare professionals to report 
suspected ADRs. It is the preferred reporting tool by SAHPRA and allows for a seamless electronic submission of ADR 
reports directly from the source into SAHPRA’s reporting systems. The app can be downloaded onto a smart mobile phone 
directly from the SAHPRA website, https://medsafety.sahpra.org.za. 
 
Figure 1: Benefits of the Med Safety App 
 
 
Confidentiality: Identities of the reporter and patient will remain strictly confidential.  
 
Your support of the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority’s adverse drug reaction monitoring 
programme is much appreciated. Information supplied by you will contribute to the improvement of medicine 
safety and therapy in South Africa.  
 
 
 
