SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 1 of 54
 
 
 
26 April 2024 
GUIDELINE FOR PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION FOR HUMAN 
MEDICINES (CATEGORIES A AND D) 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for the registration 
of Human Medicines (categories A and D) containing specified substances. With respect to Category D medicines, the 
guidance provided herein is related to general content requirements. Any specific technical guidance indicated in 
Category D medicine guidelines should be applied. In addition to this guideline, SAHPRA reserves the right to request 
any additional information to establish the safety, quality, and efficacy of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge 
current at the time of evaluation. SAHPRA is committed to ensure that all registered medicines will be of the required 
quality, safety, and efficacy. Guidelines and application forms are available from the office of the Chief Executive Officer 
and the website. 
Document History 
Final 
Version 
Reason for Amendment 
Effective Date 
 
1 
First publication released for comment 
9.09 Proposed guideline on information of Professional Information for 
human 
April 2005 
2 
Date of Implementation 
August 2008 
3 
Implementation for registered products and “Old Medicines” 
February 2015 
4 
Revised publication released for comment. 
2.16 Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines 
April 2019 
5 
- 
Content structured on the latest SAHPRA Guideline Template 
- 
Old document number 2.16 changed to SAHPGL-CEM-02 
September 2022 
6 
- 
Amendment to include CHMP guideline on risk of medicinal 
product on human reproduction and lactation: from data to 
labelling 
04 December 2023 
- 
Revised publication released for comment.  
- 
Revised publication implemented.  
 
April 2024 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 2 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Contents 
Document History .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary ............................................................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 Background ................................................................................................................................................ 6 
1.3 Scope ......................................................................................................................................................... 6 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION ...................................................................................................................................... 7 
3. 
PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION: GENERAL NOTES ..................................................................................... 7 
4. 
PRESENTATION OF PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION FOR EVALUATION ..................................................... 9 
5. 
PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION: CONTENT UNDER EACH HEADING ....................................................... 11 
6. 
REFERENCES............................................................................................................................................. 51 
7. 
VALIDITY .................................................................................................................................................. 51 
8. 
ANNEXURE ............................................................................................................................................... 52 
8.1 ANNEXURE A: The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities Terminology (MedDRA) ...................... 52 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 3 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term 
Meaning 
ADR 
Adverse Drug Reaction 
Amendments 
Used interchangeably with the term ‘variations’ 
API 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
ATC  
Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (classification system) 
CCDS  
Company Core Data Sheet 
CHMP  
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use 
EMA  
European Medicines Agency 
ERA  
Environmental Risk Assessment 
EU  
European Union 
HLT  
High Level Terms 
INN  
International Non-proprietary Name 
IPI  
Innovator Professional Information 
LLT  
Lowest Level Terms 
LTL  
Lowest Term Level 
MAH: Market 
Authorisation Holder 
Equivalent to HCR: Holder of the Certificate of Registration 
Medicinal product 
Equivalent to medicine 
MHLW  
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Japan) 
MHRA  
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority (UK) 
MSM  
Multisource Medicine  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 4 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
NCE  
New Chemical Entity 
Package Leaflet  
Equivalent to PIL: Patient Information Leaflet 
PBRER  
Periodic Benefit-Risk Evaluation Report 
PSUR  
Periodic Safety Update Report 
PT  
Preferred Term 
QRD  
Quality Review of Documents 
RMP  
Risk Management Plan 
RRA  
Recognised Regulatory Authorities – a term used to refer to the list of 
regulatory authorities with which SAHPRA aligns itself 
SAHPRA  
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority 
SI 
International System of Units  
SmPC: Summary of 
Product characteristics 
Equivalent to PI: Professional Information 
SOC  
System Organ Class 
TGA  
Therapeutic Goods Administration (Australia) 
The Authority 
Relevant regulatory authority, in this case SAHPRA 
WHO PQ 
World Health Organisation Prequalification (of Medicines Program) 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 5 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
In terms of section 35(1)(ix) of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965, as amended) 
(hereinafter ‘the Act’), the Minister of Health may, in consultation with SAHPRA, make regulations prescribing 
the information that must be furnished regarding the use of any medicine or scheduled substance. 
The General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965), 
require Professional Information (PI) to be made available for each medicine (regulation 11). As such, the PI is 
required by the Authority to be included in the application for the registration of a medicine (regulation 16(3) 
(g)). 
The PI sets out the agreed position of the medicine as determined as an outcome of the assessment process. 
As such, the content cannot be changed except with the approval of the South African Health Products 
Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA). 
The following guidelines may be applicable to the PI (SAHPRA guidelines unless indicated otherwise): 
• 
Biosimilar Medicines Guideline (old code 2.30) 
• 
Guideline on Standardised Text for Professional Information (old code 2.20) 
• 
Scheduling of Medicines Guideline SAHPGL-CEM-NS-02 
• 
Proprietary Names Guideline SAHPGL-CEM-NS-03 
• 
Multiple Submissions of the Same Application for Registration with Different Proprietary Names 
(SAHPGL-HPA-08 
• 
Quality, Safety and Efficacy Guideline for Complementary Medicines 
• 
Safety and Efficacy Guideline for Health Supplements EC Guideline on Excipients in the Labelling and 
Package Leaflet of Medicinal Products for Human Use (old code 7.04) 
• 
EC Guideline on Excipients in the Labelling and Package Leaflet of Medicinal Products for Human Use1 
• 
CHMP Guideline on the Pharmaceutical Aspects of the Product Information for Human Vaccines  
• 
CHMP Guideline on the Description of Composition of Pegylated (Conjugated) Proteins in the SmPC  
EMA guideline on the Warning of Transmissible Agents in Summary of Product Characteristics and 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 6 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Package Leaflets for Plasma-Derived Medicinal Product 
• 
CHMP guideline on risk of medicinal product on human reproduction and lactation: from data to 
labelling. 
1This guideline replaces SAHPRA’s alcohol (2.03) and sugar (2.35) guidelines. However, note that the current 
regulations pertaining to alcohol and sugar will still apply, including the definitions of “sugar” and “sweetener.” 
These regulatory requirements take precedence over the content of the EU excipients guideline. 
1.1 
Purpose 
The intention of this guideline is to: 
• 
Help applicants with the correct way of presenting the PI for evaluation; and  
• 
Enhance consistency in the content of the PI. 
1.2 
Background  
The PI is regarded as the document that ensures the safe and effective use of the medicine under most 
circumstances. It presents a scientific, objective account of the medicine’s use and limitation as established 
by the supporting evidence. The PI should not serve the purpose of a general treatment guideline/manual 
of particular medical conditions. 
SAHPRA retains the discretion to require detail under the various headings, or that information should be 
displayed in a more prominent format such as boxed and/or bolded, as it may deem necessary, while the 
applicant may motivate for the inclusion or exclusion of information. Clinical judgement regarding an 
individual medicine on whether to include certain information remains important. Applicants should 
maintain the integrity of each section of the document by only including information in each section which 
is relevant to the section heading. However, some issues may need to be addressed in more than one 
section of the PI and in such situations the individual statements may be cross-referenced to other sections 
when these contain relevant additional information. 
1.3 
Scope 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for the 
registration of Human Medicines (categories A and D) containing specified substances. With respect to 
Category D medicines, the guidance provided herein is related to general content requirements. Any 
specific technical guidance indicated in Category D medicine guidelines should be applied. In addition to 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 7 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
this guideline, SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, 
quality, and efficacy of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. SAHPRA 
is committed to ensure that all registered medicines will be of the required quality, safety, and efficacy. 
Guidelines and application forms are available from the office of the Chief Executive Officer and/or the 
website. 
2. 
LEGAL PROVISION 
In terms of section 35(1)(ix) of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965, as amended) 
(hereinafter ‘the Act’), the Minister of Health may, in consultation with SAHPRA, make regulations prescribing 
the information that must be furnished regarding the use of any medicine or scheduled substance. 
The General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act 101 of 1965), 
require Professional Information (PI) to be made available for each medicine (regulation 11). As such, the PI is 
required by the Authority to be included in the application for the registration of a medicine (regulation 16(3) 
(g)).  
3. 
PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION: GENERAL NOTES 
When referring to properties of the active ingredient such as its pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic 
properties the International Non-proprietary Name (INN) should be used, i.e. in section 5, Pharmacological 
Properties. When referring to properties relating specifically to the use of the medicine, the invented/product 
name should be used. Reference to the class of medicines may be referred to, when specific clinically relevant 
safety information is available only for the class, and then stated that it may occur with the medicine. 
Note: The INN name “epinephrine” should be followed in brackets by “adrenaline”, and the INN ‘lidocaine’ 
should be followed in brackets by ‘lignocaine”. 
Applicants should regularly consult the WHO list of INN names to ensure correct/updated spelling of INN 
names. The PI may not contain: 
• 
Information which may be intended to promote the sale of that medicine; 
• 
Any comparisons with other medicines or any reference to the product name of any medicine that is 
not the subject of the PI (with the exception of placebo); and  
• 
any statements suggestive of any potential advantage over competitors. 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 8 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
However, the following may be allowed:  
"References to concomitant / sequential use, based on clinical evidence, without referring to dosages.” When 
required to refer to dosages, these must be substantiated by clinical evidence.  
English language (United Kingdom) should be used. 
Measurements: The PI should be in accordance with the Legal Metrology Act, 2014 (Act No. 9 of 2014), as 
amended (please refer to the SAHPGL-PEM-04 Guideline on International Metric System - SI). For plasma 
concentrations the SI system should be used, e.g. ng/mL, mg/mL, etc. Clinical chemistry laboratory values 
should be expressed in SI units, e.g. mmol/litre. Blood pressure and blood gasses should be expressed as both 
millimetres mercury (mm Hg) and kilopascals (kPa), e.g. pCO2 34 mm Hg (4, 7 kPa).  
The word “medicine” should be used and not the word “drug” or “medicinal product” or “agent”. The word 
drug generally indicates a substance of abuse. This does not necessarily apply to the use of concepts which 
include the word “drug”, e.g. drug fever, pro-drug, drug eluting stent, adverse drug reaction, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). 
Source references which may be allowed include the latest editions of: 
• 
The most recent SAHPRA-approved Innovator PI (IPI – to be published electronically by SAHPRA)  
• 
The most recently approved Innovator SmPC / PI from a recognised regulatory authority (RRA) (for 
generic applications: as a supplement for safety aspects only in instances where the local IPI is 
materially outdated).  
• 
List of RRAs:, Refer to reliance guideline (SAHGL-BAU-01) 
• 
Information obtained from other RRAs (e.g., rapporteur’s reports) SAHPRA monographs for ‘Old 
Medicines’ 
• 
Other references or information from peer-reviewed journals  
• 
Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference (For safety information only, not for efficacy) 
• 
In the case of Complementary Medicines, those references stipulated in the relevant guidelines (listed 
on page 3 of this guideline) 
For a multisource medicine (MSM), the Therapeutic Indications (section 4.1) and Posology and method of 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 9 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
administration (section 4.2) must be exactly in line with that of the most recently South African approved IPI 
for the dosage form and dosage strength(s) as applied for. 
If the innovator product is not marketed anymore, the most recently updated SAHPRA approved MSM PI 
(within the last 5 years) may be used as reference for the compilation of MSM PI. 
Applicants should ensure that all safety aspects are updated in line with the IPI and other acceptable source 
references. Any additional information as required by the applicant should be submitted with relevant clinical 
data. SAHPRA reserves the right to use information from the most recently approved relevant MSM PI. 
Information from a Company Core Data Sheet (CCDS) will only be considered if substantiated by relevant data 
on which it is based.  
The applicant should ensure that Posology and method of administration in the PI is in line with the dosage 
form and dosage strength(s) as applied for. 
4. 
PRESENTATION OF PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION FOR EVALUATION 
PI presented for evaluation for a new chemical entity (NCE), for an MSM, or for a PI variation after registration 
is required to comply with the following: 
• 
The PI should be typed in black print and in English (United Kingdom); 
• 
The PI should be provided to the Authority electronically in both MS Word and PDF format; 
• 
The language, spelling and grammar, punctuation and editorial correctness in the PI text should be 
checked thoroughly before submission of the application; 
• 
Each section of the PI should first deal with those issues that apply to the core population for whom 
the medicine is indicated followed - when necessary – by specific information for any relevant special 
population (e.g. children or elderly); 
• 
Consistent current medical terminology should be used throughout the PI; 
• 
The PI provides information on a particular medicine; therefore, it should not include reference to 
other medicines (e.g. statement such as “Like other medicines of the same class”) except when it is a 
class warning recommended by SAHPRA or a RRA; and 
• 
Applicants may apply the general formatting prescribed in the EMA SmPC guidelines but must always 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 10 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
comply with the font and language requirements provided above (e.g. QRD convention to be followed 
for the EMA-QRD template).  
Each page of the annotated proposed amended PI and annotated proposed amended Patient Information 
Leaflet (PIL) should: 
• 
Be numbered as page x of y; 
• 
Be dated; 
• 
Have its text lines consecutively numbered on the left, from the first to the last page; and 
• 
Have a header reflecting the Applicant / Holder of Certificate of Registration (HCR), product name, 
dosage form(s) and strength(s). 
Changes to the PI/PIL should be indicated by single underlining for additions, strike through for deletions and 
broken underlining for re-wording or for text that has been moved. Applicants may use the ‘Track Changes’ 
functionality in MS Word to make these changes, provided that they comply with the formatting requirements 
above.  
All statements should be accurately referenced and cross-referenced.  
References for each statement should be included in a broad margin on the right-hand side of each page of 
the PI. Alternatively, the reference numbers may be included in the text as in scientific publications.  
Every statement should be verified by a reference. The exact page(s) and location on the page should be stated 
and, if possible, the column and line number. If an entire section is quoted from one source, the reference may 
be listed at the end of the relevant section. 
No references should, however, be included in the finalised PI. The clean proposed PI and PIL for registration 
should not include text line numbering.  
For a PI variation for a medicine after registration, the approved PI (for eSubmissions only), the proposed PI 
with the variation(s) and the evidence/motivation for the variation(s) should be submitted together with the 
application form. Each PI must be accompanied by a PIL, reflecting the corresponding proposed variation(s). 
[Refer to the SAHPGL-HPA-06 Variations Addendum for Human and Veterinary Medicines] 
The principles set out in this guideline are applicable to all human medicines (categories A and D). The 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 11 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
application of those principles for a particular medicine will depend on the scientific knowledge on the 
medicine. 
5. 
PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION: CONTENT UNDER EACH HEADING  
In the case of a complementary medicine (Category D medicines) the following should be included: 
• 
The words “Complementary Medicine”. 
• 
A statement identifying the discipline or the wording “Health Supplement”, as the case may be; 
• 
Which is not registered by the Authority, the following disclaimer: “This unregistered medicine has 
not been evaluated by the SAHPRA for its quality, safety or intended use.”; and 
• 
Containing at least 5 percent of genetically modified organisms the following wording, “contains 
genetically modified organisms.” 
 
SCHEDULING STATUS 
The Scheduling Status as assigned by SAHPRA and published in the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 
1965 (Act 101 of 1965), as amended. The scheduling status should be boxed above section 1, NAME OF THE 
MEDICINE. 
1 
NAME OF THE MEDICINE 
The (invented/product) name should be followed by both the strength and the pharmaceutical form (as per 
the SAHPGL-CEM-NS-03 Proprietary Names Guideline all strengths of the active substances must be 
quantified). However, when otherwise referring to the medicine throughout the PI text, the strength and 
the pharmaceutical form do not have to be mentioned in the name. The INN or the usual common name of 
the active substance should be used when referring to properties of the active substance(s) rather than 
those of the product. The use of pronouns (e.g. “it”) is encouraged whenever possible. 
Strength 
The strength should be the relevant quantity for identification and use of the product and should be 
consistent with the quantity stated in the quantitative composition and in the posology. Different strengths 
of the same medicine should be stated in the same way, e.g. 250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg. The use of decimal 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 12 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
points should be avoided where these can be easily removed (e.g. 250 microgram, not 0,25 mg). However, 
where a range of medicines of the same pharmaceutical form includes strengths of more than one unit (e.g. 
250 microgram, 1 mg, and 6 mg), it may be more appropriate in certain cases to state the strengths in the 
same unit for the purpose of comparability (e.g. 0,25 mg, 1 mg and 6 mg). For safety reasons, micrograms, 
and millions (e.g. for units) should always be spelled out in full rather than be abbreviated. 
Pharmaceutical form  
The pharmaceutical form of a medicine should be described by a single full Standard Term of the European 
Pharmacopoeia using the plural form if appropriate (e.g. coated tablets) (see section 3). If an appropriate 
standard term does not exist, a new term may be constructed.  
No reference should be made to the route of administration or container unless these elements are part of 
the standard term or where there is a particular safety reason for their inclusion or where there are identical 
products, which may be distinguished only by reference to the route of administration or to the container.  
For the expression of the name and strength of complementary medicines the declaration should be in 
accordance with existing quality or other relevant guidelines on complementary medicines. 
2 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
Full details of the qualitative and quantitative composition in terms of the active substance(s), and excipients 
where knowledge of which is essential for proper administration of the medicine, should be provided in 
section 2 and as appropriate in section 4.3 or 4.4 (refer to EC Guideline on Excipients in the Labelling and 
Package Leaflet of Medicinal Products for Human Use). The sugar status and quantity should also be included 
as part of composition (e.g. sugar free). Other composition requirements outlined in Regulation 11 (in 
addition to sugar status) should also be included in this section (e.g. name and quantity of sweetener, where 
applicable). The following standard statement should be included at the end of the section, i.e. ‘for full list 
of excipients, see section 6.1’. If a diluent/solvent is part of the medicine, information should be included in 
the relevant sections (usually sections 3, 6.1, 6.5 and 6.6). 
Qualitative declaration  
The active substance should be declared by its recommended INN, accompanied by its salt or hydrate form 
if relevant, or the European Pharmacopoeial name if that name represents an established name. If no INN 
exists, the European Pharmacopoeial name should be used or if the substance is not in the pharmacopoeia, 
the usual common name should be used. In the absence of a common name, the exact scientific designation 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 13 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
should be given. Substances not having an exact scientific designation should be described by a statement 
on how and from what they were prepared. References to the pharmacopoeial grade should not be 
included. Where the medicine is a complementary medicine, the qualitative declaration should be in 
accordance with the existing quality guidelines on complementary medicines. When the medicine is a 
radiopharmaceutical kit, the qualitative declaration should clearly indicate that the radioisotope is not part 
of the kit. 
Quantitative declaration  
The quantity of the active substance should be expressed per dosage unit (for metered dose inhalation 
products, per delivered dose and/or per metered dose), per unit volume, or per unit of weight and should 
be related to the declaration of strength in section 1. Quantity should be expressed in internationally 
recognised standard terms which could be complemented with another term if more meaningful to health 
care providers.  
Salts and hydrates  
Where the active substance is present in the form of a salt or hydrate, the quantitative composition should 
be expressed in terms of the mass (or biological activity in International (or other) units where appropriate) 
of the active moiety (base, acid, or anhydrous material), e.g. ‘60 mg toremifene (as citrate)’ or toremifene 
citrate equivalent to 60 mg toremifene’. Where a salt is formed in situ during the preparation of the finished 
product (i.e. formed during the mixture of a solvent and powder), the quantity of the active moiety should 
be stated, with a reference to the in situ formation of the salt. In the case of established active substances 
in medicines where the strength has traditionally been expressed in the form of a salt or hydrate, the 
quantitative composition may be declared in terms of the salt or hydrate, e.g. ‘60 mg diltiazem 
hydrochloride’. This may also apply when the salt is formed in situ. Note that salts or hydrates should be 
stated on the label, where applicable. 
Esters and pro-drugs  
If the active substance is an ester or pro-drug, the quantitative composition should be stated in terms of the 
quantity of the ester or pro-drug. When the active moiety is an active substance of an already approved 
medicine, the quantitative composition should also be stated in terms of the quantity of this active moiety 
(e.g. 75 mg of fosphenytoin is equivalent to 50 mg of phenytoin). Note that esters and pro-drugs should NOT 
be stated on the label. 
Oral powders for solution or suspension  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 14 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
The quantity of active substance should be stated per unit dose if the product is a single-dose preparation 
or otherwise per unit dose volume after reconstitution; a reference to the molar concentration may also be 
appropriate in some cases. 
Parenterals excluding powders for reconstitution.  
For single-dose parenterals, where the total contents of the container are given in a single dose (‘total use’), 
the quantity of active substance(s) should be stated per presentation (e.g. 20 mg etc.) not including any 
overages or overfill. The quantity per mL and the total labelled volume should also be given. For single-dose 
parenterals, where the amount to be given is calculated based on the patient’s weight or body surface or 
other variable (‘partial use’), the quantity of active substance(s) should be stated per mL. The quantity per 
total labelled volume should also be given. Overages or overfills should not be included. For multi-dose and 
large volume parenterals, the quantity of active substance(s) should be stated per mL, per 100 mL, per 1000 
mL, etc. as appropriate, except for multidose vaccines containing ‘n’ doses of the same dose. In this case, 
the strength should be expressed per dose volume. Overages or overfills should not be included. Where 
appropriate, e.g. for X-ray contrast media, and parenterals containing inorganic salts, the quantity of active 
substance(s) should also be indicated in millimoles. For X-ray contrast media with iodine-containing actives 
substances, the quantity of iodine per mL should be stated in addition to the quantity of the active 
substance. 
Powders for reconstitution prior to parenteral administration  
When the product is a powder to be reconstituted prior to administration, the total quantity of active 
substance in the container should be stated not including overages or overfills, as well as the quantity per 
mL when reconstituted, unless there are several means of reconstituting, or different quantities used, which 
result in different final concentrations. 
Concentrates  
The quantity should be stated as the content per mL in the concentrate and as the total content of the active 
substance. The content per mL when diluted as recommended should also be included unless the 
concentrate is to be diluted to within a range of different final concentrations. 
Transdermal patches  
The following quantitative details should be given: the content of active substance(s) per patch, the mean 
dose delivered per unit time, and the area of the releasing surface, e.g. ‘each patch contains 750 micrograms 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 15 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
of estradiol in a patch size of 10 cm2, releasing a nominal 25 micrograms of estradiol per 24 hours'. 
Subcutaneous hormonal contraceptive implants  
The following quantitative details should be given: the content of active substance(s) per implant, the mean 
dose delivered per unit time, and the area of the releasing surface, e.g. ‘The implant is 4 cm in length with 
a diameter of 2 mm and consists of etonogestrel vinylacetate (EVA) copolymer core, containing 68 mg of 
the synthetic progestin etonogestrel (ENG), surrounded by an EVA copolymer skin. 
Multidose solid or semi-solid products  
Quantity of active substance should be stated, where possible, per unit dose, otherwise per gram, per 100g 
or percentage, as appropriate. 
Biological medicines  
Expression of strength  
The quantity of biological medicines should be expressed in terms of mass units, units of biological 
activity, or International Units as appropriate for the particular product, and reflecting European 
Pharmacopoeia usage where relevant. For Pegylated proteins, the CHMP Guideline on the 
Description of Composition of Pegylated (Conjugated) Proteins in the SmPC should be referred to. 
 
The biological origin of the active substance 
The origin of the active substance should be defined briefly. Thus, the nature of any cellular 
system(s) used for production and, if relevant, the use of recombinant DNA technology should be 
specified. The entry should take the form: “produced in XXX cells <by recombinant DNA 
technology>”. The following are examples of the application of this principle: “produced in human 
diploid (MRC-5) cells”, “produced in Escherichia coli cells by recombinant DNA technology”, 
“produced in chick-embryo cells”, “produced from the plasma of human donors”, “produced from 
human urine”, “produced from <animal>blood”, “produced from porcine pancreatic tissue”, 
“produced from porcine intestinal mucosa”. 
Special provisions for normal immunoglobulins  
In the case of normal immunoglobulins, the IgG subclass distribution should be stated in terms of 
percent of total IgG present. The upper limit of the IgA content should follow. 
Special provisions for vaccines  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 16 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
In the case of vaccines, the content of active substance per dose unit (e.g. per 0.5 mL) should be 
stated. Adjuvants, if present, should be stated qualitatively and quantitatively. Residues that are 
of special relevance (e.g. ovalbumin in egg derived vaccines) should be specified. Additional 
specific guidance is available in CHMP guidelines on biotechnological medicines, e.g. the CHMP 
Guideline on the Pharmaceutical Aspects of the Product Information for Human Vaccines. 
Complementary medicines  
The quantitative declaration should be in accordance with the existing quality guidelines on complementary 
medicines. 
3 PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
The pharmaceutical form should be described by a full standard term of the European Pharmacopoeia (see 
section 1) using the plural form. The term used in this section should be the same as the term used in section 
1. However, where a short standard term of the European Pharmacopoeia is used on small immediate 
packaging material, the short term should be added in brackets in this section.  
A visual description of the appearance of the product (colour, markings, etc.) should be given, in a separate 
paragraph to the standard term, including information on the actual size of a solid oral formulation, e.g. 
‘Tablets, white, circular, flat, bevelled-edge tablets of 5 mm marked ‘100’ on one side’.  
In case of tablets designed with a score line, information should be given on whether reproducible dividing 
of the tablets has been shown. e.g. ‘the score line is only to facilitate breaking for ease of swallowing and 
not to divide into equal doses’, ‘the tablet can be divided into equal halves. Information on pH and 
osmolarity should be provided, as appropriate.  
In case of products to be reconstituted before use, the appearance before reconstitution should be stated 
in this section. Appearance of the product after reconstitution should be stated in sections 4.2 and 6.6. 
4 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
4.1 Therapeutic indications 
The indication(s) should be stated clearly and concisely and should define the target disease or condition 
distinguishing between treatment (symptomatic, palliative, curative or modifying the evolution or 
progression of the disease), prevention (primary or secondary) and diagnostic indication. When appropriate 
it should define the target population and/or the duration of treatment (i.e. short- or long-term treatment 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 17 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
with reference to number of days, weeks or months as substantiated by the clinical data). It should be stated 
whether the medicine is to be used as mono therapy or in combination with other relevant medicine for the 
same condition or as an adjunct treatment to an existing treatment regimen. Where relevant, it should be 
indicated whether the medicine is to induce a remission, prevent a relapse or for maintenance therapy. 
For antimicrobials: Therapeutic Indications should be linked to conditions caused by organisms known to be 
eradicated by the medicine in the clinical data submitted. Changes in the international and local 
antimicrobial resistance patterns should also be a consideration. Principles of antibiotics stewardship should 
be adhered to. 
Where results from subsequent studies provide further definition or information on an authorised 
indication, such information, provided it does not itself constitute a new indication, may be considered for 
inclusion in section 5.1.  
Mandatory conditions of product usage not covered more appropriately in other parts of the PI may also be 
included when relevant, e.g. concomitant dietary measures, lifestyle changes, or other therapy. It should be 
stated in which age groups the product is indicated, specifying the age limits, e.g. ‘invented/product name 
is indicated in <adults><neonates><infants><children> <adolescents> <aged x toy <years, months>>. If the 
product’s indication depends on a particular genotype or the expression of a gene or a particular phenotype, 
this should be stated in the indication. 
4.2 Posology and method of administration 
In case of restricted medical prescription, this section should be started by specifying the conditions. In case 
of specific safety need, any recommended restriction to a particular setting should also be stated (e.g. 
“appropriate resuscitation equipment should be available”). 
Posology  
The dosage should be clearly specified for each method/route of administration and for each indication, as 
appropriate. Where appropriate, a reference to official recommendations should be made (e.g. for primary 
vaccination and antibiotics as well as for booster dose). Dose recommendations (e.g. mg, mg/kg, mg/m2) 
should be specified per dose interval for each category where appropriate (specify age/weight/body surface 
area of subsets of the population as appropriate).  
Frequency of dosing should be expressed using time units (e.g. once or twice daily or every 6 hours) and, to 
avoid confusion, abbreviations e.g. OD or BID should not be used.  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 18 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
• 
Where appropriate, the following points should be addressed:  
• 
The maximum recommended single, daily and/or total dose,  
• 
The need for dose titration,  
• 
The normal duration of use and any restrictions on duration and, if relevant, the need for 
tapering off, or advice on discontinuation,  
• 
Advice on action to be taken if one or more dose(s) is (are) missed, or e.g. in case of vomiting 
(the advice should be as specific as possible, taking into consideration the recommended 
frequency of dosing and relevant pharmacokinetic data)  
• 
Advice on preventative measures to avoid certain adverse drug reactions (e.g. administration of 
antiemetics) with cross-reference to section 4.4,  
• 
The intake of the product in relation to fluid and food intake, together with a cross-reference to 
section 4.5 in case of specific interaction e.g. with alcohol, grapefruit, or milk,  
• 
Advice regarding repeat use, with any information on intervals to be observed between courses 
of treatment, as appropriate,  
• 
Interactions requiring specific dose adjustments with cross-reference to other appropriate 
sections of the PI (e.g. 4.4, 4.5, 4.8, 5.1, 5.2), and  
• 
It may also be relevant to recommend not to prematurely discontinue a treatment in case of 
specific non-serious adverse reaction(s) that are frequent but transient or manageable with 
dose titration. Where relevant to the particular product, the following should appear ‘The 
potency of this medicine is expressed in <invented name> units. These units are not 
interchangeable with the units used to express the potency of other <active substance name> 
preparations. 
Special populations  
Dosage adjustments or other posology related information in specific patient groups should be stated where 
necessary, in well-defined sub-sections ordered by importance, e.g. regarding:  
• 
Elderly population: it should be made clear whether any dosage adjustment is necessary in any 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 19 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
subsets of the elderly population, with cross-reference to other sections providing information 
in elderly, e.g. 4.4, 4.5, 4.8 or 5.2. 
• 
Renal impairment: the dose recommendation should relate as precisely as possible to the cut-
off values for biochemical markers of renal impairment in clinical studies and to the results of 
these studies;  
• 
Hepatic impairment, specified according to the patients included in studies, for instance ‘alcohol-
related cirrhosis’ and the definitions used in the studies, for instance Child-Pugh score/grade of 
the patients;  
• 
Patients with a particular genotype; with cross-reference to other relevant sections for further 
detail as appropriate;  
• 
Other relevant special population (e.g. patients with other concomitant disease or overweight 
patients).  
Advice relevant for dosage adjustment e.g. from monitoring of clinical symptoms and signs, and/or 
laboratory investigations, including blood concentrations of the medicine should be mentioned when 
appropriate with cross-reference to other sections where appropriate. 
Paediatric population  
The specific sub-section ‘paediatric population’ should always be included, and the information given should 
cover all subsets of the paediatric population, using a combination of the possible situations presented 
below as appropriate. If the product is indicated in the paediatric population, posology recommendations 
should be given for each of the relevant subsets.  
The age limits should reflect the benefit-risk assessment of the available documentation for each subset. If 
the posology is the same in adults and children, then a statement to this effect is sufficient; the posology 
does not need to be repeated.  
Dose recommendations (e.g. mg, mg/kg, mg/m2) should be specified per dose interval for the paediatric 
subsets where the product is indicated. Different subsets may require different dosing information. If 
necessary, recommendations in preterm newborns should be presented considering the more appropriate 
age e.g. gestational age.  
Depending on the subset, the clinical data and available formulations, the dose will be expressed according 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 20 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
to weight or body surface area, e.g. “children aged 2-4 years, 1 mg/kg bodyweight twice a day”. When 
appropriate, information on timing of intake of the product should consider children’s daily life, e.g. school 
or sleep.  
Where a product is indicated in children and no adequate paediatric formulation can be developed, detailed 
instructions on how to obtain an extemporaneous preparation shall be included in section 6.6 with a cross-
reference in section 4.2.  
Doses and method of administration in the various subsets may be presented in a tabulated format. If there 
is no indication for the product in some or all subsets of the paediatric population, no posology 
recommendation can be made, but available information should be summarised using the following 
standard statements (one or combination of several as appropriate):  
• 
The <safety> <and> <efficacy> of X in children aged x to y <months, years> <or any other relevant 
subsets e.g. weight, pubertal age, gender> <has><have> not <yet> been established.  
One of the following statements should be added:–  
- <No data are available>.  
or  
- <Currently available data are described in section <4.8><5.1><5.2> but no recommendation on a 
posology can be made >  
• 
X should not be used in children aged x to y <years, months><or any other relevant subsets e.g. 
weight, pubertal age, gender> because of <safety> <efficacy> concern(s) <concern(s) to be stated 
with cross-reference to sections detailing data (e.g. 4.8 or 5.1)>.  
• 
There is no relevant use of X in <the paediatric population><in children aged x to y><years, 
months>><or any other relevant subsets e.g. weight, pubertal age, gender> in the indication(s) 
<specify indication(s)>.  
• 
X is contraindicated in children aged x to y <years, months> <or any other relevant subsets e.g. 
weight, pubertal age, gender> <in the indication …> (cross-reference to section 4.3). If there are 
more appropriate strength(s) and/or pharmaceutical form(s) for administration in some or all 
subsets of the paediatric population (e.g. oral solution for infants), these can be mentioned in 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 21 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
section 4.2 of the PI of the less appropriate one(s). E.g.: Other pharmaceutical forms/strengths 
may be more appropriate for administration to this population. 
Method of administration  
Any special precautions related to the manipulation or administration of the product (e.g. cytotoxic 
products) by health care providers (including pregnant health care providers), the patient or caregivers 
should be mentioned here under a specific sub-heading (<Precaution to be taken before manipulating or 
administering the product>), with a cross-reference to section 6.6 (or 12).  
The route of administration and concise relevant instruction for correct administration and use should be 
given here. Information on instructions for preparation or reconstitution should be placed in section 6.6 
‘Special precautions for disposal and other handling’ (or in section 12 if appropriate) and cross-referenced 
here. 
When supportive data are available, information on alternative method(s) to facilitate administration or 
acceptability should be given as explicitly as possible (e.g. possibility of crushing tablet, cutting tablet or 
transdermal patch, pulverising tablet, opening capsules, mixing with food, dissolution in drinks – specifying 
if a proportion of the dose can be given) particularly for administration via feeding tubes.  
Any specific recommendation for use related to the pharmaceutical form should be explained, e.g.:  
• 
“The coated tablet should not be chewed because of <bad taste>, 
• 
“The enteric-coated tablet should not be crushed because coating prevents <pH sensitive 
degradation><irritant effects> on the gut”, 
• 
“The coated tablet should not be broken because the coating is intended to ensure a prolonged 
release (see 5.2)”.  
For parenteral formulations, information on the rate or speed of injection or infusion should be provided. 
The compatibility of the medicine with IV fluids should be stated when it is to be added to IV fluids for 
infusion.  
For parenteral formulations - in children, especially newborns in whom quite often fluids must be restricted 
- it would be useful to have information on maximal concentration that can be safely administered (e.g. "no 
more than X mg of Y/mL of solution"). 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 22 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
4.3 Contraindications  
For generic applications, this section must be aligned with the local IPI approved by SAHPRA. 
Situations/scenarios/circumstances where administration of the medicine may cause potentially life-
threatening complications, serious harm/morbidity, and/or death/mortality. Such circumstances could 
include a particular clinical diagnosis, concomitant diseases, demographic factors (e.g. gender, age) or 
predispositions (e.g. metabolic or immunological factors, a particular genotype and prior adverse reactions 
to the medicine or class of medicines). The situations should be unambiguously, comprehensively, and 
clearly outlined.  
Other medicines or classes of medicine, which must not be used concomitantly or consecutively should be 
stated, based on either data or strong theoretical reasons. If applicable a cross-reference to section 4.5 
should be made.  
In general, patient populations not studied in the clinical trial programme should be mentioned in section 
4.4 and not in this section unless a safety issue which may potentially be life threatening or may cause death 
can be predicted (e.g. use of renally eliminated substances with narrow therapeutic margin in renal failure 
patients). If, however, patients have been excluded from studies due to a contraindication on grounds of 
safety, they should be mentioned in this section. If applicable a cross-reference to section 4.4 should be 
made.  
Only if pregnancy or breastfeeding is contraindicated, should it be mentioned here. In section 4.6, a cross-
reference should be made, and further background information provided.  
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients or residues from the manufacturing 
process should be included, as well as any contraindication arising from the presence of certain excipients 
(see EC Guideline on Excipients in the Labelling and Package Leaflet of Medicinal Products for Human Use).  
For complementary medicines, hypersensitivity extended to other plants of the same family or to other 
parts of the same plant should be labelled as a contraindication, where applicable.  
Lack of data alone should not lead to a contraindication. Where for safety reasons, the product should be 
contraindicated in a specific population, e.g. paediatric or a subset of the paediatric population, it should 
appear in this section with a cross-reference to the section giving detailed information on the safety issue. 
A contraindication in the paediatric population should be listed without a sub-heading.  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 23 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Porphyria should be included if absolutely contraindicated. (Cross-reference to section 4.4)  
For combination products the contraindications for APIs must be presented for the combination. 
Contraindications are to be presented in bullet format where relevant. 
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use 
The order of warnings and precautions should in principle be determined by the importance of the safety 
information provided.  
Specific safety issues, especially those which may be fatal, life threatening or cause serious harm (adverse 
effects), may be required to be placed in a prominently displayed box and/or in boldface type. Such 
information may be displayed at the top of this section, or may be displayed elsewhere in the PI, as deemed 
appropriate. 
The exact content of this section will be different for each product and the therapeutic conditions it is 
intended to treat. It is however suggested that the following items should be included where relevant to the 
specific product.  
Information on a specific risk should be given in section 4.4 only when the risk leads to a precaution for use 
or when health care providers must be warned of this risk. Patient groups in which use of the medicine is 
contraindicated should be mentioned in section 4.3 only and not to be repeated here. The following should 
be described:  
• 
The conditions, in which the use of the medicine could be acceptable, provided that special 
conditions for use are fulfilled. In particular, specific risk minimisation measures requested as 
part of a Risk Management Plan to ensure safe and effective use should be described in this 
section. (For example; “Liver function should be monitored before initiation of treatment and 
monthly thereafter”, “Patients should be advised to immediately report any symptoms of 
depression and/or suicidal ideation”, “Women of childbearing potential should use 
contraception”,) 
• 
Special patient groups that are at increased risk or are the only groups at risk of experiencing 
product or product class-related adverse reactions (usually serious or common), e.g. elderly, 
children, patients with renal or hepatic impairment (including the degree of impairment, e.g. 
mild, moderate or severe), patients having an anaesthetic or patients with cardiac failure 
(including in this case the NYHA Classification for example) For renal impairment in adults, if the 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 24 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
creatinine clearance (CrCl) is used to indicate the impairment, use the following: mild renal 
impairment: CrCl≥50-80 ml/min; moderate renal impairment CrCl>30-50 mL/min; severe renal 
impairment CrCl<30 ml/min . For calculation of creatinine clearance use the South African Renal 
Society modification of the Cockroft and Gault formula: eCrCl mL/min=[(140-age) x weight (kg) x 
0.85 (if female)] divided by serum creatinine (micromoles/litre). For hepatic impairment use 
Child-Pugh classification or modification thereof. Cross-reference to section 4.8 on the 
differential effects in terms of frequency and severity of the specified adverse reaction should 
be provided.  
• 
Serious adverse reactions to which health care providers need to be alerted, the situations in 
which these may occur and the action that may be required, e.g. emergency resuscitation. 
• 
If there are specific risks associated with starting the medicine (e.g. first dose effects) or stopping 
it (e.g. rebound, withdrawal effects), these should be mentioned in this section, together with 
the action required for prevention.  
• 
Any measures which can be taken to identify patients at risk and prevent the occurrence or 
detect early the onset or worsening of noxious conditions. If there is a need for awareness of 
symptoms or signs representing early warning of a serious adverse reaction, a statement should 
be included.  
• 
Any need for specific clinical or laboratory monitoring should be stated. Recommendation for 
monitoring should address why, when, and how the monitoring should be conducted in clinical 
practice. If dose reduction or other posology is recommended in such circumstances or 
conditions, this should be included in section 4.2 and cross-referenced here.  
• 
Any special warnings and precautions necessary for excipients, or residues from the 
manufacturing process.  
• 
For complementary medicines containing alcohol, information about the ethanol content in the 
medicine should be included in accordance with the EC Guideline on Excipients in the Labelling 
and Package Leaflet of Medicines for Human Use. 
• 
Any warnings necessary with respect to transmissible agents (e.g. Warning of Transmissible 
Agents in Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflets for Plasma-Derived Medicinal 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 25 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Products). 
• 
Subjects or patients with a specific genotype or phenotype might either not respond to the 
treatment or be at risk of a pronounced pharmacodynamic effect or adverse reaction. These may 
arise because of non-functioning enzyme alleles, alternative metabolic pathways (governed by 
specific alleles), or transporter deficiencies. Such situations should be clearly described if known.  
• 
Any particular risk associated with an incorrect route of administration (e.g. necrosis risk with 
extravasation of intravenous formulation, or neurological consequences of intravenous use 
instead of intramuscular use), should be presented, with advice on management if possible.  
Any adverse reactions described in this section or known to result from conditions mentioned here should 
also be included in section 4.8.  
Specific 
interference 
with 
laboratory 
tests 
should 
be 
mentioned 
when 
appropriate, 
e.g. 
Coombs/antiglobulin test and beta-lactams. They should be clearly identified with a subheading, e.g. 
“Interference with serological testing”.  
In general, descriptions of warnings and precautions regarding pregnancy and breastfeeding, ability to drive 
and use machines, and interference with mental and/or physical abilities to perform/execute daily 
tasks/activities requiring mental alertness, judgment and/or sound coordination and /or vision and other 
aspects of interactions should be dealt with in sections 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7, respectively. However, in specific 
cases of major clinical importance it might be more appropriate to describe specific precautionary measures 
in this section, e.g. contraception measures, or when concomitant use of another medicine is not 
recommended, and with cross reference to section 4.5, 4.6, or 4.7.  
If relevant, include whether the medicine may lead to a positive test for a prohibited substance in 
competitive sport activities.  
In case of anaesthetic medicines or medicines used for conscious sedation, the following warning should be 
included: “Interference with daily activities may continue for up to 24 hours and no legal/contractual 
decisions should be entered into for 24 hours after receiving anaesthetic/conscious sedation. Alcohol use 
should also be avoided for the same time period.” 
Include whether the medicine may affect the performance of child and adult learning in schools and other 
institutions of education, learning and training.  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 26 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
For combination products the special warning and precaution for use of APIs must be presented for the 
combination. Include risk management/minimisation measure were relevant.  
For co-packed medicines the special warning and precautions for use of each of the APIs co-packaged should 
be presented separately if is to be taken sequentially and for those co-packed medicines containing 
multicomponent fixed drug combination and a mono component medicine to be taken at the same time, 
the special warning and precaution for use of the APIs must be presented for the combination of the APIs 
contained in the co-pack. 
Paediatric population 
When the product is indicated in one or more subsets of the paediatric population and there are warnings 
and precautions for use that are specific to the paediatric population or any subset of the paediatric 
population, they should be identified under this subheading. Any necessary warning or precaution in 
relation to long-term safety (e.g. on growth, neuro-behavioural development, or sexual maturation) or 
specific monitoring (e.g. growth) in the paediatric population should be described. When long-term safety 
data are necessary but not yet available, it should be stated in this section. Warnings should be included in 
case of possible significant or long-lasting impact on children’s daily activities, such as learning ability or 
physical activities, or in case of impact on appetite or sleep pattern. 
If measures are requested that are specific to the paediatric population for which the product is indicated 
(e.g. as part of a Risk Management Plan), these measures should be described in this section. 
4.5 Interaction with other medicines and other forms of interaction 
This section should provide information on the potential for clinically relevant interactions based on the 
pharmacodynamic properties and in vivo pharmacokinetic studies of the medicine, with a particular 
emphasis on the interactions, which result in a recommendation regarding the use of this medicine. This 
includes in vivo interaction results which are important for extrapolating an effect on a marker (‘probe’) 
substance to other medicines having the same pharmacokinetic property as the marker. 
Interactions affecting the use of this medicine should be given first, followed by those interactions resulting 
in clinically relevant changes on the use of others.  
Interactions referred to in other sections of the PI should be described here and cross-referenced from other 
sections.  
The order of presentation should be contraindicated combinations, those where concomitant use is not 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 27 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
recommended, followed by others.  
The following information should be given for each clinically relevant interaction: 
a) Recommendations – these might be: 
• 
Contraindications of concomitant use (cross-refer to section 4.3); 
• 
Concomitant use not recommended (cross-refer to section 4.4); and 
• 
Precautions including dose adjustment (cross-refer to sections 4.2 or 4.4, as appropriate), 
mentioning specific situations where these may be required. 
b) Any clinical manifestations and effects on plasma levels and AUC of parent compounds or active 
metabolites and/or on laboratory parameters.  
c) Mechanism, if known, for example, interaction due to inhibition or induction of cytochrome 
P450 should be presented as such in this section, with a cross-reference to 5.2 where in vitro 
results on inhibition or induction potential should be summarised.  
Interactions not studied in vivo but predicted from in vitro studies or deducible from other situations or 
studies should be described if they result in a change in the use of the medicine, cross-referring to sections 
4.2 or 4.4.  
This section should mention the duration of interaction when a medicine with clinically important 
interaction (e.g., enzyme inhibitor or inducer) is discontinued. Adjustment of dosing may be required as a 
result.  
The implication for the need for a washout period when using medicines consecutively should also be 
mentioned. 
Information on other relevant interactions such as with complementary medicines, food, alcohol, smoking, 
or pharmacologically active substances not used for medical purpose, should also be given. Regarding 
pharmacodynamic effects where there is a possibility of a clinically relevant potentiation or a harmful 
additive effect, this should be stated.  
In vivo results demonstrating an absence of interaction should only be mentioned here if this is of major 
importance to the prescriber (e.g. in therapeutic area where potentially problematic interactions have been 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 28 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
identified such as with anti-retroviral medicines).  
If no interaction studies have been performed, this should be clearly stated. 
Additional information on special populations 
If there are patient groups in which the impact of an interaction is more severe, or the magnitude of an 
interaction is expected to be larger e.g., patients with decreased renal function (in case the parallel pathway 
is renal excretion), paediatric patients, elderly etc., this information should be included here.  
If interactions with other medicines depend on polymorphisms of metabolising enzymes or certain 
genotypes, this should be stated. 
Paediatric population 
Information specific to a subset of the paediatric population should be given here if there is an indication 
for the particular age group.  
The resulting exposure and clinical consequences of a pharmacokinetic interaction can differ between adults 
and children, or between older and younger children. Therefore; 
• 
Any identified treatment recommendations should be given in relation to concomitant use in 
the paediatric subset(s) (e.g. dose adjustment, extra-monitoring of clinical effect 
marker/adverse reactions, therapeutic drug monitoring). 
• 
If the interaction studies have been performed in adults, the statement ‘Interaction studies have 
only been performed in adults’ should be included.  
• 
If the extent of an interaction is known to be similar in a paediatric age group to that in adults, 
this should be stated.  
• 
If this is not known, this should also be stated.  
The same applies to pharmacodynamic drug interactions.  
In cases of food interaction leading to a recommendation on co-administration with a meal or specific food, 
it should be specified whether this is relevant for paediatric use (especially newborns and infants) whose 
diet is different (100 % milk in newborns).  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 29 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Overall, section 4.5 should be presented in the simplest possible way to highlight the interactions resulting 
in a practical recommendation regarding the use of the medicine. Presentation in a tabulated format may 
help where interactions are numerous and various, such as with anti-viral products.  
For combination products the interactions for individual active pharmaceutical ingredient must be stated 
and characterised according to severity. 
4.6 Fertility, pregnancy, and lactation 
General principles: Efforts should be made by the applicant/HCR to provide the reasons for the 
recommendations for use in pregnant or lactating women and in women of childbearing potential. 
This information is important for the health care providers informing the patient.  
In the overall assessment, all available knowledge should be considered, including clinical studies and post-
marketing surveillance, pharmacological activity, results from non-clinical studies, and knowledge about 
compounds within the same class.  
Efforts should be made to update the recommendations for use during pregnancy and lactation based on 
increasing human experience in exposed pregnancies which eventually supersede the animal data.  
In case of contraindication, this should be included in section 4.3. The following should be mentioned: 
Women of childbearing potential / Contraception in males and females 
Recommendations on the use of the medicine in women of childbearing potential should be given when 
appropriate including the need for pregnancy test or contraceptive measures. Where an effective 
contraception is required for patients or partners of patients during treatment or for a defined period before 
starting or after ending treatment, the rationale should be included in this section. If contraceptive measures 
are recommended, there should also be a cross-reference to section 4.5 (and possibly 4.4) in case of 
interaction with oral, injectable, and implanted contraceptives. 
Pregnancy 
In general, clinical, and non-clinical data should be followed by recommendations.  
With respect to non-clinical data,  
• 
Only conclusions of the reproductive toxicity studies should be included in this section. Further 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 30 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
details should be provided in section 5.3.  
With respect to clinical data,  
• 
The section should include comprehensive information on relevant adverse events reported in 
the embryo, the foetus, neonates, delivery/birth process and pregnant women, when 
appropriate. The frequency of such events (for example the frequency of birth defects) should 
be specified when available.  
• 
The section should specify the extent of the human experience if no adverse events have been 
reported in pregnancy. With respect to the recommendations:  
o Recommendations on the use of the medicine during the different periods of gestation, 
including the reason(s) for these recommendations, should be given. 
o Recommendations for the management of exposure during pregnancy when 
appropriate (including relevant specific monitoring such as foetal ultrasound, specific 
biological or clinical surveillance of the foetus or the neonate) should be given.  
Cross-references can be included in sections 4.3, 4.4 and 4.8, as appropriate.  
Statements such as “where the benefit outweighs the risk” or “at the discretion of the prescriber / medical 
practitioner” or “should not be used unless clearly necessary” will not be allowed.  
Counselling for both partners may be indicated. 
If the API presents a risk to the labour/delivery process, and/or newborn/neonate, this information should 
be included under additional sub-headings in this section. 
Breastfeeding 
If available, clinical data should be mentioned (exposed breastfed infants) as the conclusions of kinetic 
studies (plasma concentrations in breastfed infants, transfer of the active substance and/or its metabolite(s) 
into human milk…). 
Information on adverse reactions in nursing neonates should be included if available.  
Conclusions from non-clinical studies on the transfer of the active substance and/or its metabolite(s) into 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 31 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
milk should be given only if no human data are available.  
Recommendations should be given to stop or continue breastfeeding and/or to stop or continue the 
treatment in cases where treatment or breastfeeding discontinuation is recommended, and the reason 
should be provided. 
Fertility 
The main information on the possible effects of the medicine on male and female fertility should be 
included. This section should include: 
• 
Clinical data if available; 
• 
Relevant conclusions from non-clinical toxicity studies, if available. Further details should be 
included in section 5.3; and 
• 
Recommendations for the use of the medicine when pregnancy is planned but fertility might be 
affected by treatment.  
Cross-references could be included in section 4.3, if appropriate.  
If there are no fertility data at all, then this should be clearly stated. 
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
Based on the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profile, reported adverse reactions and/or specific 
studies in a relevant target population addressing the performance related to driving and road safety or 
using machines, specify whether the medicine has a) no or negligible influence b) minor influence, c) 
moderate influence or d) major influence on these abilities. Other important factors that affect the ability 
to drive and use machines should be considered if known, e.g. duration of the impairing effect and the 
development of tolerance or adverse reactions with continued use. 
For situations c and d, special warnings/precautions for use should be mentioned here (and in section 4.4 
for situation d).  
Include whether the medicine may affect mental and/or physical abilities to perform or execute tasks or 
activities requiring mental alertness, judgment and/or sound coordination and vision. 
4.8 Undesirable effects 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 32 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
This section should include all adverse reactions from clinical trials, post-authorisation safety studies and 
spontaneous reporting for which, after thorough assessment, a causal relationship between the medicine 
and the adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, based for example, on their comparative incidence 
in clinical trials, or on findings from epidemiological studies and/or on an evaluation of causality from 
individual case reports. Adverse events, without at least a suspected causal relationship, should not be listed 
in the PI.  
The content of this section should be justified in the Clinical Overview of the application for registration 
based upon a best-evidence assessment of all observed adverse events and all facts relevant to the 
assessment of causality, severity, and frequency. This section should be regularly reviewed and, if necessary, 
updated with the aim to ensure appropriate information to health care providers on the safety profile of 
the product. In addition, the whole section could be revised at the renewal of the registration, where the 
safety profile of most products is likely to be well established, and after evaluation of time specified at 
PSURs/PBRERs.  
It is important that the whole section is worded in concise and specific language and does not include 
information such as claims regarding the absence of specific adverse reactions, or statements of general 
good tolerability. Statements on lack of proof of causal association should not be included.  
With the aim to provide clear and readily accessible information, section 4.8 should be structured according 
to the following recommendations:  
a) Summary of the safety profile  
b) Tabulated summary of adverse reactions  
c) Description of selected adverse reactions 
d) <Paediatric population>  
e) <Other special population(s)>  
a. Summary of the safety profile  
The summary of the safety profile should provide information about the most serious and/or most 
frequently occurring adverse reactions.  
If known, it may be helpful to indicate the timing when adverse reactions occur. For example, to prevent 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 33 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
early discontinuation of a treatment, it may be important to inform about non-serious adverse reactions 
that are frequent in the beginning of the treatment but may disappear with its continuation. Another 
example would be to inform about adverse reaction associated with long-term use. Frequencies of cited 
adverse reactions should be stated as accurately as possible. This summary of the safety profile should be 
consistent with the important identified risks mentioned in the Safety Specification of the Risk Management 
Plan (RMP). The information should be consistent with the Table of Adverse Reactions (see section b). Cross-
reference should be made to section 4.4 if relevant risk minimisation measures have been proposed in that 
section. 
An example of an acceptable statement is given below:  
‘At the beginning of the treatment, epigastric pain, nausea, diarrhoea, headache, or vertigo may occur; these 
reactions usually disappear within a few days even if treatment is continued. The most commonly reported 
adverse reactions during treatment are dizziness and headache, both occurring in approximately 6% of 
patients. Serious acute liver injury and agranulocytosis may occur rarely (less than 1 case per 1,000 patients)’  
b. Tabulated list of adverse reactions  
A single table (or structured listing) should list all adverse reactions with their respective frequency category 
(note the exceptions to the use of a single table below). In some cases, for common or very common 
reactions, and when it is necessary for the clarity of the information, frequency figures may be presented in 
the table.  
Separate tables are acceptable in exceptional cases where the adverse reaction profiles markedly differ 
depending on the use of the product. For example, it might be the case for a product used for different 
indications (e.g. an oncology and a non-oncology indication) or at different posologies.  
Adverse events reported with post-marketing clinical studies (phase IV studies) should be reflected in a 
separate table. 
The table should be presented according to the MedDRA system organ classification. The system organ class 
(SOC) should be presented in the order shown in the annexure. Adverse reactions descriptions should be 
based on the most suitable representation within the MedDRA terminology. This will usually be at the 
Preferred Term (PT) Level, although there may be instances where the use of Lowest Term Level (LTL) or 
exceptionally group terms, such as High Level Terms (HLT) may be appropriate. As a general rule, any 
adverse reactions should be assigned to the most relevant SOC related to the target organ. For example, PT 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 34 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
‘Liver function test abnormal’ should be assigned to the SOC ‘Hepatobiliary disorders’ rather than to the 
SOC ‘Investigations’. Within each system organ class, the adverse reactions should be ranked under headings 
of frequency, most frequent reactions first. Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions should be 
presented in the order of decreasing seriousness. The names used to describe each of the frequency 
groupings should follow standard terms established in each official language using the following convention: 
Very common (≥1/10); common (≥1/100 to <1/10); uncommon (≥1/1 000 to <1/100); rare (≥1/10 000 to 
<1/1 000); very rare (<1/10 000). 
Presentation of ADR information relative to placebo should be presented as absolute percentages (not as 
placebo subtracted). 
In exceptional cases, if a frequency cannot be estimated from the available data, an additional category 
frequency ‘not known’ may be used. In case the expression “Frequency not known” is used, the following 
text should be added in the list of terms explaining the frequency categories: “not known (cannot be 
estimated from the available data)”. The expressions isolated/single cases/reports should not be used.  
Where additional details about an adverse reaction are described in section c), the reaction concerned 
should be highlighted, for example with an asterisk, and “see section c)” should be included as a footnote. 
Guidance on how to estimate the frequency of an adverse reaction is provided at the end of this chapter of 
the guideline.  
If there are only a few adverse reactions in total in this section, classification by SOC may be unnecessary. 
For combination products the side effects must be first presented for the combination, and then separately 
for each API.  
c. Description of selected adverse reactions  
This section should include information characterising specific adverse reactions which may be useful to 
prevent, assess or manage the occurrence of an adverse reaction in clinical practice.  
This section should include information characterising individual serious and/or frequently occurring 
adverse reactions, or those where there have been reports of particularly severe cases. The information 
should provide frequency and may describe for example reversibility, time of onset, severity, duration, 
mechanism of the reaction (if of clinical relevance), dose relationship, relationship with duration of exposure 
or risk factors. Measures to be taken to avoid specific adverse reactions or actions to be taken if specific 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 35 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
reactions occur should be mentioned under section 4.4 and cross-referenced here.  
Information on the occurrence of withdrawal reactions may be mentioned here with cross-reference to 
section 4.2 in case of need for tapering off or advice on discontinuation of the product.  
Mention should be made here of any differences between different dosage forms in respect of adverse 
reactions.  
In the case of combination products, information should be included in this sub-section pointing out which 
particular adverse reactions are usually attributable to which active substance of the combination, where 
known.  
Any adverse reactions resulting directly from an interaction should be mentioned here and cross-referenced 
to section 4.5.  
This section should also inform on adverse reactions with very low frequency or with delayed onset of 
symptoms which may not have been observed in relation to the product, but which are considered to be 
related to the same therapeutic, chemical, or pharmacological class. The fact that this is a class attribution 
should be mentioned.  
Any adverse reaction specific to excipients or residues from the manufacturing process should be included.  
d. <Paediatric population>  
A paediatric sub-section should always be included (unless irrelevant).  
The extent and age characteristics of the safety database in children should be described (e.g. from clinical 
trials or pharmacovigilance data). Uncertainties due to limited experience should be stated.  
If the observed safety profile is similar in children and adults this could be stated: e.g. “Frequency, type and 
severity of adverse reactions in children are <expected> to be the same as in adults”. Similarly, it is 
appropriate to state whether the safety profiles in the different paediatric subsets are similar or not.  
Any clinically relevant differences (i.e. in nature, frequency, seriousness, or reversibility of adverse reactions) 
between the safety profiles in adult and paediatric populations, or in any relevant age groups, should be 
described and presented by age group. If there is a need for specific monitoring, this should be highlighted 
by cross-referencing to section 4.4. For clinically relevant differences, a separate table listing such adverse 
reactions by frequency can be added and presented by relevant age groups if appropriate. If some paediatric 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 36 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
adverse reactions are considered common (≥1/100 to <1/10) or very common (≥1/10), the frequencies 
should be provided in parentheses. In case of major difference with the safety profile in adults, a summary 
of the safety profile in children could be presented to facilitate the presentation of the information. 
Available information, from any source scientifically validated, on long-term safety in children (e.g. on 
growth, mental development, and sexual maturation) should also be summarised, whether positive or 
negative, with cross-reference to section 5.1 if appropriate. Any risk factors such as duration of treatment 
or period at risk should be specified.  
If relevant, symptoms of neonatal withdrawal should be listed in a separate paragraph with cross reference 
to section 4.6.  
e. <Other special populations>  
This section may include information on any clinically relevant differences (i.e. in nature, frequency, 
seriousness, or reversibility of adverse reactions, or need for monitoring) specifically observed in other 
special populations such as elderly, patients with renal impairment, patients with hepatic impairment, 
patients with other diseases or a specific genotype. Cross-reference to other sections such as 4.3, 4.4 or 4.5 
may be added as appropriate.  
Adverse reactions may also be related to genetically determined product metabolism. Subjects or patients 
deficient in the specific enzyme may experience a different rate or severity of adverse reactions. This should 
be mentioned and where relevant correlated with data from clinical trials. 
Further guidance on the estimation of frequency of adverse reactions 
The estimation of the frequency of an adverse reaction depends on the data source (i.e. clinical trial, post-
authorisation safety study or spontaneous reporting), the quality of data collection and causality evaluation. 
If the choice of the frequency category is based on different sources, the category representing the highest 
frequency should be chosen unless a more specific method has been applied and thus resulted in an 
estimate of clearly higher validity, e.g. a pooled analysis across suitable studies.  
Sources of data should use population exposed to the doses and treatment duration as recommended in 
the PI. 
Reactions that are reported under different terms but represent the same phenomenon (e.g., sedation, 
somnolence, drowsiness) should ordinarily be grouped together as a single adverse reaction to avoid diluting 
or obscuring the true effect. Similarly, reactions that represent a syndrome complex should ordinarily be 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 37 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
grouped together under an appropriate heading to avoid obscuring the full range of respective symptoms.  
Adverse reactions from clinical trials  
Safety data from several studies should be pooled to increase the precision of adverse reaction rates as 
appropriate without introducing bias (e.g. major difference in population characteristics or exposure to the 
product). 
The frequency of adverse reactions should be derived from pooled placebo-controlled studies if these data 
are available, and the databases are sufficiently large to be informative. If these data are unavailable or not 
sufficiently informative, active-controlled data or possibly single-arm or add-on trials databases could be 
used to estimate frequencies. Frequency should represent crude incidence rates (and not differences or 
relative risks calculated against placebo or another comparator).  
When a common, very common or serious adverse reaction (e.g. suicide) also occurs in the placebo group 
with a relevant frequency, both incidence rates can be stated to put the risk into perspective (e.g. in 
subsection c).  
Adverse reactions from safety studies  
The choice of the frequency category to which any adverse reaction will be assigned is based on the point 
estimate of the crude incidence rate derived from a study designed in such a way that specific adverse events 
occurring in patients within a defined observation period would have been detected and reasonably 
attributed to the medicine. In this situation, it is possible to calculate a point estimate of the crude incidence 
rate using standard statistical methods. In cases where the original information is expressed as an incidence 
density (denominator expressed as person-time), an appropriate transformation into an incidence 
proportion should be performed for choosing the frequency category. Normally, incidence proportions for 
the most representative exposure period (e.g. 1 week, 3 months, 1 year) should be used to derive the 
frequency category. However, this may not be appropriate if the hazard function increases over time; in this 
case, the adverse reaction, and its frequency pattern, when clinically relevant, should be properly described 
in section c).  
The frequency category to be chosen for each adverse reaction should not be based on differences 
calculated against a comparator. However, when data are derived from a study with a non-exposed group 
and the rate difference attributed to the medicine is smaller than the baseline or background incidence rate, 
and if the adverse reaction is considered important, the background incidence may be provided (e.g. in 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 38 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
section c).  
Adverse reactions from spontaneous reporting  
The number of spontaneous reports should not be stated because the number can quickly become 
outdated. Frequencies based on reporting rates from a spontaneous reporting system should not be used 
to assign frequency category. In case of an unexpected adverse reaction detected from spontaneous 
reporting, each adequately designed study where this adverse reaction could have been detected should be 
reviewed to choose a frequency category. If the adverse reaction has never been observed in clinical trials, 
then the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval is not higher than 3/N with N representing the total 
sample size summed up across all relevant clinical trials and studies (e.g. those with a follow-up long enough 
to detect the adverse reaction). For example, if a particular adverse reaction has not been observed among 
3 600 subjects exposed to the product in clinical trials and studies, then the upper limit of the 95% 
confidence interval for the point estimate is 1/(1 200) or less and the frequency category should be "rare", 
based on worst value of the point estimate. The rationale for the frequency category for that particular 
reaction could be explained in sub-section c). 
For data from sources other than clinical trials/studies data 
When the frequency of occurrence of adverse events is not available from clinical studies, the terms 
“frequent” or “less frequent” should be used. The following guide should be applied for frequency 
information obtained from sources other than clinical trials: 
• 
‘more frequent’, ‘very common’ and ‘common’ ≡ ‘frequent’ 
• 
‘single reports’ or ‘isolated reports’, ‘uncommon’, ‘rare’, ‘very rare’ ≡ ‘less frequent’. 
Such frequency information may be sourced from PI approved by other RRAs or may be obtained from 
reference sources that the Authority recognises. The term reporting the highest frequency should always 
be used and all information must be clearly referenced. The appropriateness of the source(s) remains at the 
discretion of the Authority. 
When no frequency data are available for a specific ADR, the statement “frequency not known” or 
“frequency unknown” may be added, with justification provided in the applicant’s cover letter for the lack 
of information and providing the reference sources consulted. 
Note: For a MSM PI without its own clinical trial data, ADRs should be categorised according to the frequency 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 39 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
classification: ‘Frequent’ and ‘Less frequent’. 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicine is important. It allows continued 
monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicine. Health care providers are requested  to report any 
suspected adverse drug reactions to SAHPRA via the Med Safety APP (Medsafety X SAHPRA) and eReporting 
platform (who-umc.org) found on SAHPRA website.    
Applicants may include additional, dedicated contact details for the reporting of side effects directly to the 
HCR. 
4.9 Overdose 
Describe acute symptoms and signs and potential sequelae. If no information is available, include the 
statement "In overdose, side effects can be precipitated and/or be of increased severity.” and cross 
reference to section 4.8. 
Considering all relevant evidence, describe management of overdose in man, e.g. in relation to monitoring 
or use of specific agonists/antagonists, antidotes, or methods to increase elimination of the medicine such 
as dialysis [gastric lavage should be excluded]. However, there should not be any dosage recommendation 
of other medicines (e.g. antidotes) as it could create conflict with the PI of those other products, unless this 
is specifically indicated by SAHPRA (e.g. standardised text). 
If applicable, counteractive measures based on genetic factors should be described. 
Additional information on special populations  
Information specifically observed in special populations such as elderly, patients with renal impairment, 
patients with hepatic impairment, other concomitant diseases etc. should be included. 
Paediatric population 
If there are specific paediatric considerations, there should be a sub-section entitled ‘paediatric population’.  
Special mention should be made of those medicines/strengths of a formulation for which ingestion of only 
one dose unit by children can cause fatal poisoning. 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 40 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
5 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
Sections 5.1 – 5.3 should normally mention information which is relevant to the prescriber and to other 
health care providers, considering the approved therapeutic indication(s) and the potential adverse drug 
reactions. Statements should be brief and precise.  
The sections should be updated regularly as new information becomes available, especially in relation to 
the paediatric population. 
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties 
This section should start with the class of the medicine (previously pharmacological classification), in 
accordance with Regulation 9 of the General Regulations made in terms of the Medicines and Related 
Substances Act (Act 101 of 1965). [Note: SAHPRA intends to replace this current nomenclature and system 
of class with the pharmacotherapeutic group and World Health Organisation (WHO) Anatomical Therapeutic 
Chemical (ATC) code, as per the EMA SmPC Guideline. This change will only come into effect once the 
associated regulation amendments have been published in the Government Gazette.] 
In case of medicine authorised as similar biological medicine, the following statement will be included:  
< Product Name> is a biosimilar medicine. 
• 
Mechanism of action (if known) 
• 
Pharmacodynamic effects. 
• 
Clinical efficacy and safety. 
It may be appropriate for an applicant of a New Chemical Entity (NCE) to provide limited information, 
relevant to the prescriber, such as the main results (statistically compelling and clinically relevant) regarding 
pre-specified end points or clinical outcomes in the major trials and giving the main characteristics of the 
patient population. Such information on clinical trials should be concise, clear, relevant, and balanced, and 
should summarise evidence from relevant studies supporting the indication. The magnitude of effects 
should be described using absolute figures. (Relative risks or odd ratio should not be presented without 
absolute figures). Clinical efficacy studies of a known molecule should be removed from the PI. 
In the exceptional cases when clinically relevant information from subgroup or post-hoc analyses is 
presented, it should be identified as such in a balanced manner reflecting the limited robustness of both 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 41 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
positive and negative secondary observations.  
Any relevant pharmacogenetic information from clinical studies may be mentioned here. This should include 
any data showing a difference in benefit or risk depending on a particular genotype or phenotype.  
For combination products the pharmacodynamic effects of each API must be presented separately. 
For antimicrobials: 
Do not include antimicrobial sensitivity data derived from in vitro testing but include data on inherent 
resistance. 
Paediatric population  
The results of all pharmacodynamic (clinically relevant) or efficacy studies conducted in children should be 
presented under this sub-heading.  
Information should be updated when new relevant information becomes available. Results should be 
presented by age or relevant subsets. When there are data available, but there is no authorised paediatric 
indication, data should be presented and a cross-reference should always be made to section 4.2 and, as 
appropriate to 4.3.  
In presenting results of studies, particular attention should be given to include the relevant safety data. For 
exploratory studies, the results of the main endpoints should be given with the main characteristics of the 
population studied and the doses used.  
When they are available, information and results of confirmatory studies should usually supersede and 
replace those of exploratory studies. For confirmatory studies, the objectives, the study duration, the doses 
used (and the formulation used if different from the marketed one), the main characteristics of the patient 
population studied (including age and number of patients), and the main results regarding pre-specified 
endpoints should be provided, whether positive or negative. If data are considered inconclusive, this should 
be stated. The objective and the main results or the conclusion of any specific clinical safety study should 
also be given. 
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties 
Pharmacokinetic properties of the active substance(s) relevant for the advised dose, strength and the 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 42 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
pharmaceutical formulation marketed should be given in this section. 
If these are not available, results obtained with other administration routes, other pharmaceutical forms or 
doses can be given as alternative.  
For combination products the pharmacokinetic properties of each API must be presented separately. 
Basic primary pharmacokinetic parameters, for instance bioavailability, clearance, and half-life, should be 
given as mean values with a measure of variability.  
Pharmacokinetics items, which could be included in this section when relevant, are given below.  
a) General introduction, information about whether the medicine is a pro-drug or whether there are 
active metabolites, chirality, solubility, information on the population in which general 
pharmacokinetic data were obtained, etc.  
b) General characteristics of the active substance(s) after administration of the medicine formulation to 
be marketed.  
• 
Absorption: complete or incomplete absorption; absolute and/or relative bioavailability; first 
pass effect; Tmax; the influence of food; in case of locally applied medicine the systemic 
bioavailability; involvement of transport proteins. If available, information on the site of 
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract should be stated (as it may be important for 
administration by enteral feeding tubes).  
• 
Distribution: plasma protein binding; apparent volume of distribution per kilogram body weight 
(L/kg); tissue and/or plasma concentrations; pronounced multi-compartment behaviour; 
involvement of transport proteins. 
• 
Biotransformation: degree of metabolism; which metabolites; activity of metabolites and 
contribution to effect and toxicity; enzymes involved in metabolism; site of metabolism; results 
from in vitro interaction studies that indicate whether the new compound can induce/inhibit 
metabolic enzymes. 
• 
Elimination: elimination half-lives, total clearance; inter and/or intra-subject variability in total 
clearance; excretion routes of the unchanged substance and the metabolites including the 
relative portion of the hepatic and renal eliminated fraction; involvement of transport proteins.  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 43 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
• 
Linearity/non-linearity: linearity/non-linearity of the pharmacokinetics of the active substance 
with respect to dose and/or time; if the pharmacokinetics are nonlinear with respect to dose 
and / or time, the underlying reason for the non-linearity should be presented.  
Additional relevant information should be included here.  
c) Characteristics in specific groups of subjects or patients  
• 
Variations with respect to factors such as age, weight, gender, smoking status, polymorphic 
metabolism, and concomitant pathological situations such as renal failure, hepatic disease, 
including degree of impairment. If the influence on pharmacokinetics is clinically relevant, it 
should be described here in quantitative terms (cross-reference to section 4.2 when applicable).  
d) Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship(s)  
• 
Relationship between dose/concentration/pharmacokinetic parameter and effect (either true 
endpoint, validated surrogate endpoint or side effect).  
• 
The population studied should be described.  
Paediatric population  
Results of pharmacokinetic studies in the different paediatric age groups should be summarised, with a 
comparison to adults if available. If appropriate, the dose producing similar product exposure as in adults 
could be given. The pharmaceutical form(s) used for pharmacokinetic studies in children should be stated. 
Uncertainties due to limited experience should be stated. 
5.3 Preclinical safety data 
Information should be given on any findings in the non-clinical testing which could be of relevance for the 
prescriber, in recognising the safety profile of the medicine used for the authorised indication(s), and which 
is not already included in other relevant sections of the PI. 
If the results of the non-clinical studies do not add to the information needed by the prescriber, then the 
results (either positive or negative) need not be repeated in the PI.  
The findings of the non-clinical testing should be described in brief with qualitative statements as outlined 
in the following examples:  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 44 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
• 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety 
pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, genotoxicity, carcinogenic potential and toxicity to 
reproduction and development. 
• 
Effects in non-clinical studies were observed only at exposures considered sufficiently in excess 
of the maximum human exposure indicating little relevance to clinical use. 
• 
Adverse reactions not observed in clinical studies but seen in animals at exposure levels similar 
to clinical exposure levels and with possible relevance to clinical use were as follows.  
Findings of non-clinical studies relevant for use in the paediatric population, including juvenile animals and 
peri- or post-natal studies, should be presented with a discussion of their clinical relevance, under a sub-
heading if necessary.  
<Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA)> 
Where relevant, conclusions on the environmental risk assessment of the product should be included, with 
reference to section 6.6. SAHPRA will indicate in which instances the ERA is required. 
6 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
6.1 List of excipients 
A list should be given of the excipients, expressed qualitatively only. All excipients, which are present in the 
product, should be included, even those present in small amounts, such as printing inks. Further details on 
the excipients to be declared may be found in the section on definitions and examples in the EC Guideline 
on the Excipients in the Labelling and Package Leaflet of Medicines for Human Use. For transdermal patches, 
all ingredients of the patch (including the adhesive, release liner and backing film) should be mentioned.  
The active substance itself, residues of substances used during manufacture of the finished product (for 
example, solvents, head-space gases, or antibiotics in vaccine manufacture), lubricants for prefilled syringes 
and constituents of capsule shells for inhalation powders not intended to be taken should not be included.  
However, certain residues such as residues of antibiotic or other antimicrobial medicines used in production 
that are known allergens with a potential for inducing undesirable effects should be mentioned in section 
4.3 or 4.4 as appropriate.  
Excipients should be referred to by their recommended INN if existing, accompanied by the salt or hydrate 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 45 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
form if relevant or by their European Pharmacopoeia name. If an excipient has neither an INN nor European 
Pharmacopoeia name, it should be described by its usual common name. References to the pharmacopoeial 
quality should not be included. E numbers should be given along with the common name of the excipient 
where they exist and when necessary for proper use, e.g. when the excipient is listed in the EC Guideline on 
the Excipients in the Labelling and Package Leaflet of Medicines for Human Use (as having recognised action 
or effect).  
The ingredients in excipient mixtures should be listed individually. In cases where the full composition of a 
flavour or fragrance is not known to the applicant or is too complex, it may be declared in general terms 
(e.g. ‘orange flavour’, ‘citrus perfume’). However, any of the components, which are known to have a 
recognised action or effect, should be included.  
Ingredients that may or may not be added for the pH adjustment should be followed by the parenthesis ‘(for 
pH-adjustment)’. PH adjusters should be listed, even if not present in the final product. All other excipients 
which are not present in the final product should not be listed. 
Invented names or general descriptive names such as ‘printing ink’ should not be used in place of the 
common name of an ingredient or of a mixture of ingredients but may be used in conjunction with the 
name(s) of the ingredient(s), so long as it is clear which ingredients are described by the name. Chemically 
modified excipients should be declared in such a way as to avoid confusion with the unmodified excipients, 
e.g. ‘pregelatinised starch’. 
In the case of a product containing a covert marker for the purpose of tracking, tracing and authentication, 
a general term such as “authentication factor” should be included in the list of excipients instead of the 
name of the excipient, unless the excipient is one that is known to have a recognised action or effect. 
For clarity, it is recommended that each excipient be listed on a separate line. It can be useful to list 
excipients according to the different parts of the product, e.g. tablet core/coat, capsule contents/shells, etc. 
For products that are presented in more than one container or in dual-chamber containers, the excipients 
should be listed per container or per chamber.  
Abbreviations for excipients should not be used. However, where justified for space considerations, 
abbreviations for excipient names may appear on the labelling, on condition that these abbreviations are 
designated in section 6.1. 
6.2 Incompatibilities 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 46 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Information on physical and chemical incompatibilities of the medicine with other products with which it is 
likely to be mixed or co-administered should be stated. This is particularly important for medicines to be 
reconstituted and/or diluted before parenteral administration. Significant interaction problems, e.g. 
sorption of products or product components to syringes, large volume parenteral containers, tubing, in-line 
filters, administration sets, etc. should be stated.  
Statements concerning compatibility of the product with other medicines or devices should not be included 
in this section but in section 6.6. Statements concerning pharmacological and chemical/physical 
incompatibilities with food should be included in section 4.5. If appropriate, the standard statement, ‘Not 
applicable’ (e.g. solid oral pharmaceutical forms), should be included.  
For certain pharmaceutical forms, e.g. parenterals, either of the following standard statements should be 
included as appropriate:  
• 
‘In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicine must not be mixed with other medicines.’  
• 
‘This medicine must not be mixed with other medicines except those mentioned in section 6.6.’ 
6.3 Shelf life 
The shelf life should be given for the medicine as packaged for sale and, if appropriate, after dilution or 
reconstitution or after first opening.  
A clear statement of the shelf life should be given, in an appropriate unit of time. Storage conditions should 
be specified according to the Note for Guidance on declaration of storage conditions in the product 
information of medicinal products. 
For statements to be included regarding in-use shelf life of sterile products, consult the Note for Guidance 
on maximum shelf life for sterile products for human use after first opening or following reconstitution. An 
in-use shelf life may need to be stated for other medicines if development studies have found it to be 
necessary.  
Additionally, if different concentrations need to be prepared, e.g. for use in children, the physicochemical 
stability throughout the entire concentration range should be stated, e.g. “The stability has been 
demonstrated between x mg/mL and y mg/mL for t hours/days at 25 °C and 2-8 °C”.  
In case of a paediatric indication, if no age-appropriate formulation is available for children but an 
extemporaneous formulation could be prepared from an existing formulation, relevant physicochemical 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 47 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
data on storage and stability should be included here with a cross-reference in sections 6.4 and 6.6."  
In case of specific temporary storage conditions needing to be provided to health care providers or patients, 
e.g. for the purpose of ambulatory use (e.g. shelf-life 24 months at 2- 8°C of which 3 months could be below 
25°C), specific additional guidance should be provided as appropriate. Such information should always be 
based on stability data. In particular, the recommended temperature range and maximum duration of 
temporary storage should be specified. This guidance may also include the action to be taken after the 
product has been stored under the temporary storage conditions (e.g. discard immediately).  
Statements such as “These data are not recommendations for storage” should not be used. No reference 
should be made to the container unless there are different shelf lives for different containers. Storage 
conditions should not be included, except for the storage conditions after opening (see the corresponding 
guideline). Statements such as ‘Do not use after the expiry date’ should not be included.  
When a device is supplied together with a medicine, the in-use shelf-life of the device should be given where 
applicable. 
6.4 Special precautions for storage 
Storage warnings should use one or more of the standard statements from the Note for Guidance on 
declaration of storage conditions in the product information of medicinal products.  
When such a standard statement is used, an explanation specifying whether the product is sensitive to light 
and/or moisture should be added.  
For storage of sterile products that have been opened, diluted, or reconstituted, a cross-reference should 
be made to section 6.3.  
Note that if a specific storage warning is required, the warning should be consistent between the PI, label 
and PIL.  
A warning to keep the product out of the reach and sight of children should not be included in the PI.  
If there are no special precautions for storage, the statement “This medicine does not require any special 
storage conditions” should be included. 
6.5 Nature and contents of container 
Reference should be made to the immediate container using the European Pharmacopoeia standard term; 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 48 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
the material of construction of the immediate container should be stated (e.g., ‘glass vials’, ‘PVC/Aluminium 
blisters’, ‘HDPE bottles’); and any other component of the product should be listed, e.g. needles, swabs, 
measuring spoons, syringes inhaler devices, desiccant. The graduation on measuring devices should be 
explained. The container of any solvent provided with the medicine should also be described. Excessive 
detail, e.g., concerning the colour of the stopper, the nature of the heat-seal lacquer, should usually not be 
included. For parenteral preparations, when enclosure colour is used to differentiate between the 
presentations of a product, this should be stated here.  
If appropriate, it should be indicated if the container closure is child-resistant. Examples on the text in this 
section:  
‘<Volume> mL suspension in a pre-filled syringe (glass) with plunger stopper (chlorobutyl rubber) 
with or without needle in pack sizes of 5 or 10.’  
‘HDPE bottle with a child-resistant closure and a silica gel desiccant. Pack-sizes of 30, 60 or 90 film-
coated tablets.’ 
All pack sizes should be listed. Pack sizes mentioned should include the number of units, number of doses 
(for e.g. multi-dose vaccines, inhalers, etc.), total weight or volume of the immediate container, as 
appropriate, and the number of containers present in any outer carton. If appropriate, a standard 
statement, ‘Not all pack sizes may be marketed’, should be included, to alert health care providers to the 
fact that not all listed pack sizes may be available for prescribing or dispensing.  
Multiple unit packs for distribution purposes only do not constitute new pack sizes for marketing of the 
product and should therefore not be included in this section. 
6.6 Special precautions for disposal <and other handling> 
Instructions for disposal should be included here, if appropriate for the product. Where special precautions 
for the handling and disposal of certain products such as cytotoxics and some biological products or waste 
material derived from it are advised, e.g. in the case of products containing live organisms, these should be 
stated in this section, as should, where relevant, the disposal of items which come into contact with the 
product, or spoons used to administer oral vaccines.  
If relevant, a cross-reference to conclusions on the environmental risk assessment described in section 5.3 
can be included. If applicable, e.g. for cytotoxics, the following standard statement should be included, ‘Any 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 49 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.’  
If there are no special uses or handling instructions for the pharmacist or other health care providers, the 
standard statement, ‘No special requirements.’ should be included.  
Any directions necessary for the accurate preparation of certain products such as cytotoxics and some 
biological products and/or necessary for the protection of persons including parents or caregivers preparing 
or handling the product should be stated.  
In section 4.2, instructions on handling of the product by the doctor, other health care provider, or patient 
should be included, as well as general information concerning the administration of the product (whether 
administered by the patient or the health care provider). If instructions for use/handling are needed where 
the medicine must be prepared before use, e.g. where it must be suspended or diluted, this information 
must be given here.  
For clarity, a cross-reference in section 4.2 to the relevant information in section 6.6 could be included, e.g. 
‘For instructions on dilution of the product before administration, see section 6.6.’  
It is recommended that only information necessary for the pharmacist or other health care provider to 
prepare the product for administration to the patient should be included here.  
Information on the preparation (e.g. the suspension of a powder for injection or preparing a dilution) of the 
medicine should be included in section 6.6, regardless of who prepares the product (e.g. pharmacist, doctor, 
other health care provider, patient, parents, or caregivers). In the case of products for reconstitution, the 
appearance of the product after reconstitution should be stated.  
Statements concerning compatibility of the product with other medicines or devices can be given here 
provided the data have been provided in the dossier.  
In the exceptional cases where a product is indicated in children and where no adequate paediatric 
formulation can be developed (based on duly justified scientific grounds), information on extemporaneous 
formulation should appear under a sub-heading “Use in the paediatric population” and should cross-refer 
to section 4.2. Detailed instructions for the preparation of the extemporaneous formulation from the 
appropriate “adult” or other “older children” dosage form and additional information on extemporaneous 
formulations for use in younger children shall be provided and, where appropriate, the maximum storage 
time during which such preparation will conform to its specifications. When necessary, the required 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 50 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
packaging material and storage conditions should be stated here.  
Any specific warnings for the handling of the product should be in section 4.4. Information on risks due to 
occupational exposure should be included in this section, with cross-reference to section 4.4 or 4.8 if there 
is information in that section. 
7 
HOLDER OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
Name and permanent address or registered place of business of the Holder of Certificate of Registration. 
Telephone, fax numbers or e-mail addresses may be included (not websites or emails linking to websites). 
8 
REGISTRATION NUMBER(S) 
Item to be completed by SAHPRA or by the Holder of Certificate of Registration once the authorisation has 
been granted. 
9 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
The date on the registration certificate of the medicine.  
10 DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
Leave blank in the case of a first application for registration.  
The date of the most recently revised PI as approved by SAHPRA [for example date of approval of a variation, 
Urgent Safety Restriction notice, or any other variation that has been approved/considered approved 
according to the timelines stipulated in the SAHPGL-HPA-06 Variations Addendum for Human and Veterinary 
Medicines]. 
11  DOSIMETRY (IF APPLICABLE) 
Full details of internal radiation dosimetry should be included in this section for radiopharmaceuticals. For 
all other products, this section should be excluded. 
12 INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS (IF APPLICABLE) 
For radiopharmaceuticals, additional detailed instructions for extemporaneous preparation and quality 
control of such preparation and, where appropriate, maximum storage time during which any intermediate 
preparation such as an eluate or the ready-to-use pharmaceutical will conform to its specifications.  
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 51 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
Special instructions relating to the disposal of containers and unused contents should also be included. 
 
6. 
REFERENCES 
6.1. EMA guideline on Summary of Product Characteristics, 2009.  
6.2. Guide for the use of the International System of Units (SI), NIST publication, 2019.  
 
7. 
VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces the previous 
guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D), old document number 2.16. 
It will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when required. 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 52 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
8. 
ANNEXURE 
8.1 
ANNEXURE A: The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities Terminology (MedDRA) 
All ADRs should be grouped according to the following order based on the MedDRA system organ classes 
(SOC). As a general rule, MedDRA terms should be classified according to the most relevant SOC related to 
the target organ. 
A pragmatic approach to the location of terms should be taken in order to make the identification of adverse 
reactions simpler and clinically appropriate for the reader. For example, it may be helpful on some occasions 
– solely in the context of the PI - to use secondary SOC locations of some MedDRA Preferred Terms (PT), or 
sometimes to use locations that do not strictly accord with the MedDRA architecture. For example, if the 
PT ‘Liver function test abnormal’, ‘Hepatitis’ and ‘Hepatic encephalopathy’ are to be included in a PI, it 
would be acceptable to include them all under the SOC ‘Hepatobiliary disorders’ instead of distributing the 
reactions among the SOCs ‘Hepatobiliary disorders’, ‘Nervous system disorders’ and ‘Investigations’ as 
dictated by their primary location in MedDRA. 
SOC LIST 
• 
Infections and Infestations 
• 
Neoplasms benign, malignant, and unspecified (including cysts and polyps) 
• 
Blood and lymphatic system disorders 
• 
Immune system disorders 
• 
Endocrine disorders 
• 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
• 
Psychiatric disorders 
• 
Nervous system disorders 
• 
Eye disorders 
• 
Ear and labyrinth disorders 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 53 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
• 
Cardiac disorders 
• 
Vascular disorders 
• 
Respiratory, thoracic, and mediastinal disorders 
• 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
• 
Hepato-biliary disorders 
• 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders 
• 
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders 
• 
Renal and urinary disorders 
• 
Pregnancy, puerperium, and perinatal conditions 
• 
Reproductive system and breast disorders 
• 
Congenital, familial, and genetic disorders 
• 
General disorders and administration site conditions 
• 
Investigations 
• 
Injury, poisoning and procedural complications 
• 
Surgical and medical procedures 
• 
Social circumstances 
• 
Product issues 
Adverse reaction descriptions should be based on the most suitable representation within the MedDRA 
terminology. This will usually be at the PT level, although there may be instances where the use of Lowest 
Level Terms (LLT) or group terms, such as high-level terms (HLT) may be appropriate. It is acceptable to 
adapt the names of the MedDRA group terms if this makes their meaning more transparent to the reader 
of the PI, e.g. the use of the suffixes NEC and NOS are not appropriate for inclusion in the PI. The adverse 
reaction term should be expressed in natural word order, e.g. ‘Interstitial pneumonia’ in preference to 
SAHPGL-CEM-02_v6 
Page 54 of 54
Guideline for Professional Information for Human Medicines (Categories A and D)  
26 April 2024 
 
 
‘Pneumonia interstitial’. It may be appropriate to modify MedDRA terms in other ways in the interests of 
comprehensibility. The most widely recognised term for a particular condition should be used, e.g. the use 
of ‘Churg Strauss syndrome’ might be more appropriate than the use of ‘Allergic granulomatous angiitis’. 
Within each MedDRA SOC, adverse reactions should be classified according to their frequency of 
occurrence. Prior to estimating frequency of occurrence of adverse events from systematic studies (clinical 
trials or other sources), appropriate levels of the MedDRA hierarchy should be used to group together 
clinically related conditions in a meaningful way. For example, if ‘postural dizziness’, ‘exertional dizziness’ 
and ‘unspecified dizziness’ were each reported by 2% of patients, this might reasonably be represented in 
the PI as ‘Dizziness’ occurring in 6% of patients (assuming that only one report of dizziness applied to each 
patient). It may also be appropriate to use ad hoc groupings of terms, or to adapt MedDRA group terms if 
the established MedDRA group terms are not completely suitable, e.g. reports of adverse reactions 
represented as ‘Diarrhoea’, ‘Diarrhoea aggravated’, ‘Loose stools’, ‘Stools watery’, ‘Intestinal hypermotility’ 
or other might all reasonably be represented as the single term ‘Diarrhoea’ in the interest of making the PI 
relevant and comprehensible to patients. The total number of those cases should be used to estimate the 
frequency of diarrhoea.  
