SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 1 of 14
 
 
 
6 February 2023 
GUIDELINE FOR FIXED DOSE COMBINATION PRODUCTS (FDC 
PRODUCTS) FOR HIV/AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for the registration of medicines. 
It represents the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) current thinking on the safety, quality and efficacy of 
medicines. It is not intended as an exclusive approach. SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish 
the safety, quality and efficacy of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. Alternative approaches 
may be used but these should be scientifically and technically justified. SAHPRA is committed to ensure that all registered medicines 
will be of the required quality, safety and efficacy. It is important that applicants adhere to the administrative requirements to avoid 
delays in the processing and evaluation of applications.  
 
Guidelines and application forms are available from the office of the Chief Executive Officer and the website. 
Document History 
Final 
Version 
Reason for Amendment 
Effective Date 
 
1 
First issue released for comments, approved and published for 
implementation 
August 2012 
2 
- 
Content structured on the latest SAHPRA Guideline Template 
- 
Old document number 2.31 changed to SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02 
February 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DR BOITUMELO SEMETE-MAKOKOTLELA  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 2 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
Contents 
Document History .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Glossary ............................................................................................................................................................. 3 
1 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 Scope ......................................................................................................................................................... 6 
2 
CONSIDERATIONS ...................................................................................................................................... 7 
3 
NONCLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY ................................................................................. 9 
3.1 Microbiology .............................................................................................................................................. 9 
3.2 Non-clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology Scenarios ............................................................................... 9 
4 
CLINICAL SAFETY AND EFFICACY .............................................................................................................. 11 
5 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CLINICAL STUDIES (SCENARIOS 3 AND 4) ........................................... 12 
6 
SELECTION OF ENDPOINTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS (SCENARIOS 3 and 4) .................................................... 13 
7 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 13 
8 
VALIDITY .................................................................................................................................................. 14 
 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 3 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation/ Term: 
Meaning: 
Active Moiety 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
API 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
AUC 
The area under the curve for the parent active or metabolite concentration in 
plasma, serum, or whole 
blood against time. 
AUC 
Area under the curve 
BE 
Bioequivalence 
Bioavailability 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
Bioequivalence (BE) 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
Bioequivalent FDC 
product 
An FDC product that can be substituted in patient care for an innovator 
product. It has demonstrated bioequivalence to a referenced innovator 
product and completed manufacturing processes and controls. By following 
the innovator’s administration instructions, the bioequivalent FDC product 
can be expected to have the same clinical safety and efficacy profile in 
patients as the innovator product. The bioequivalent FDC product can rely on 
the innovator product’s clinical and preclinical safety and efficacy data and 
forgo a formal clinical safety and efficacy clinical testing program. These 
products, often produced by many different manufacturers, are sometimes 
referred to as multisource interchangeable products. In some jurisdictions 
these products are called generic products. However, because in other 
jurisdictions, the term generic does not include the critical concept of BE, the 
use of the term generic product in international documents is not 
recommended. 
Bridging Toxicity Study 
A limited non-clinical study that allows the assessment of the overall toxicity 
of a multi-component regimen or an FDC product consisting of individual 
active components for which the toxicity is already well characterized at the 
dose level of interest. The design of such a study will depend on the existing 
knowledge of the toxicity and toxicokinetics of the individual components. 
CDER 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
Cmax 
The observed maximum or peak concentration of a parent active moeity or 
metabolite in plasma, serum, or whole blood. 
Cmin 
The minimum concentration of a parent active moeity or metabolite 
measured between one dose and the next. 
Efficacy 
The desired effect of a medicine on a disease condition. Efficacy must be 
established by substantial evidence, such as independently corroborated 
evidence, usually from appropriately blinded well-controlled clinical trials, 
which demonstrate that the product will have the effect claimed in the 
intended population according to predetermined statistical and clinical 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 4 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
criteria. 
EWP 
Efficacy Working Party 
FDC 
Fixed-Dose combination 
Fixed-dose combination 
(FDC) product 
A single product created by the combination of two or more active 
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) in a single formulation, and in which each 
API contributes to the benefit of the new product. FDC products are not 
simply two single, distinct products packaged together. APIs can be 
pharmaceutical (i.e. chemical) or biologic in origin. 
GMP 
Good Manufacturing Practice 
ICH 
International Conference on Harmonisation 
Innovator FDC product 
The first registered formulation of a new FDC product, generally as a patented 
medicine on the basis of original scientific documentation of safety, efficacy, 
and pharmaceutical quality. 
Innovator product 
The first registered formulation of a new product, generally as a patented 
medicine on the basis of original scientific documentation of safety, efficacy, 
and pharmaceutical quality. 
Microbiology 
Includes bacteria, viruses, and parasites. 
Monotherapy 
Using one active component for the treatment of a condition. 
Multi-component 
Regimen 
Using more than one active component simultaneously for the same 
condition. 
Multisource Product 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
New Molecular Entity 
An active pharmaceutical ingredient that has never been used in a marketed 
finished dosage form. 
Pharmaceutical 
Equivalence 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
PK 
Pharmacokinetic 
Post-marketing Active 
Surveillance 
Active surveillance seeks to ascertain completely the number of adverse 
events via a continuous pre-organised process. 
Post-Marketing 
Surveillance 
Procedures implemented after registration of a medicine for a given 
indication that is designed to provide information on the actual use of the 
medicine for that indication and on the occurrence of related side effects. 
The surveillance usually involves survey techniques rather than controlled 
trials. 
Registered FDC product 
An FDC product for human use which has underlying clinical, preclinical, and 
manufacturing data, that has been evaluated and approved for registration by 
the Medicines Control Council and meets required scientific and legal 
standards for authorized marketing in the Republic of South Africa. 
Safety 
A measure of the product’s ability to cause the desired effect without harming 
the patient. As no medicine is completely safe, a positive risk-benefit ratio 
needs to be established for the intended patient population based on non-
clinical and clinical data (i.e., that the established benefits of the product 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 5 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
outweigh the known risks of the product when used as directed in the 
intended population). 
Stability 
Refer to the Stability guideline. 
Statistical Equivalence 
When the efficacy/evaluated effect of the investigational product does not 
differ substantially in either direction from the comparator. If two treatments 
are to be declared equivalent, then the two-sided (1-α) x 100 percent 
confidence interval should lie entirely within a pre-specified interval (α is 
defined as the type I error of the test). 
Statistical Non-inferiority 
The efficacy / evaluated effect of the investigational product is not 
substantially inferior to that of the comparator. The lower bound of the (1-α) 
x 100 percent confidence interval around the observed efficacy / effect of the 
investigational product minus the observed efficacy / effect of the comparator 
product is greater than the pre-specified limit (α is defined as the type I error 
of the test). 
Statistical Superiority 
When the efficacy / evaluated effect of an investigational product is better 
than that of the comparator. The lower bound of the (1-α) x 100 percent 
confidence interval around the observed efficacy / effect of the 
investigational product minus that of the comparator product is greater than 
zero (α is defined as the type I error of the test). 
Surveillance 
Spontaneous reports voluntarily reported either to pharmaceutical 
manufacturers, to national or regional pharmacovigilance centres, or to 
national regulatory authorities by healthcare professionals, other 
professionals, or consumers. 
Systematic Review 
An analysis of an existing body of evidence that addresses clearly formulated 
questions and uses systemic and explicit methods to identify, select and 
critically appraise relevant research using statistical or nonstatistical methods. 
Therapeutic Equivalence 
Defined in the Biostudies guideline. 
Tmax 
The time point after administration of the medicine at which Cmax is 
observed. 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 6 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria are the foremost infectious disease threats to public health. Combination 
therapy is considered to be essential in the treatment of these diseases and in the prevention of resistance. 
From a public health perspective, an important approach to addressing the management of HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria has included the development of fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of individual 
components administered together in one dosage form. Among others, FDCs simplify treatment regimens, 
improve convenience of use and patient adherence, facilitate the implementation of interventional programs, 
and potentially limit the development of resistance. The importance of combination therapy is not unique to 
AIDS/HIV, malaria and tuberculosis. Combination therapy is also used in the treatment of infections other than 
those listed above, as well as in non-infectious diseases such as hypertension, diabetes and epilepsy. However, 
the scope of this policy document is to concentrate only on combination therapies to be used for treating 
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. 
Notwithstanding the benefits described above, there are challenges related to the development and use of 
FDCs such as dose-titration of the individual components, the interplay of adverse effects, allergies to one or 
more of the components, and complex pharmacokinetic (PK) or pharmacodynamic profiles. 
It should be noted that the risk/ benefit assessments for FDCs may have to take into consideration the 
differences in anticipated patient populations, and that decision-making may vary between the different 
medicine regulatory authorities. It should also be noted that this document does not relate to biological 
medicines. 
1.1 
Purpose 
This policy document provides principles to be taken into account when evaluating FDC products. These 
principles focus on scientific aspects of efficacy and safety of FDC products intended for the treatment of 
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. 
References consulted are listed at the end of the document. 
1.2 
Scope 
This guideline is intended to provide recommendations to applicants wishing to submit applications for the 
FDC products. Any specific technical guidance indicated in Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products 
(FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria should be applied. In addition to this guideline, 
SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information to establish the safety, quality and efficacy 
of a medicine in keeping with the knowledge current at the time of evaluation. SAHPRA is committed to 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 7 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
ensure that all registered medicines will be of the required quality, safety and efficacy.  
2 
CONSIDERATIONS 
2.1 
In the evaluation of FDC products, it is necessary to take three factors into account: 
2.1.1 The safety and efficacy of the individual active components. 
2.1.2 The safety and efficacy of the simultaneous use of the individual active components (multi-
component regimen); and 
2.1.3 The possible chemical and physical interactions between active components derived from a 
multi-component regimen when they are formulated into an FDC product. 
2.2 
The following considerations generally apply when determining whether active components are 
suitable for a multi-component regimen and hence also for inclusion in an FDC product. The medical 
and scientific rationale should support the simultaneous use of more than one active component in 
at least one of the following ways: 
2.2.1 Increased efficacy (additive or synergistic).  
2.2.2 Reduced toxicity. 
2.2.3 Limiting the development of resistant pathogens; and  
2.2.4 Boosting of active moiety levels. 
2.3 
Additionally, FDC products have some important advantages over multi-component regimens, such 
as:  
2.3.1 Improved adherence.  
2.3.2 Convenience of use.  
2.3.3 Reduced number of dosage units and/or simplified treatment regimens; and  
2.3.4 Facilitating the logistics of procurement, distribution, and dispensing. 
2.4 
In evaluating a practical FDC dosage regimen, it is necessary to ensure that constituent active 
components have suitable PK and physicochemical properties. Several factors need to be considered:  
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 8 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
2.4.1 Combining active components with different pharmacokinetic characteristics may be 
problematic. For example, combining antimicrobials with short and long elimination half-lives 
may result in the emergence of resistance where a single component persists in the absence 
of the companion active(s) particularly in the case of long-term treatment. It may be possible 
to address differences in pharmacokinetics by modification of FDC product formulations.  
2.4.2 Conflicting effects of food on the bioavailability of the components might complicate a dosing 
strategy: and  
2.4.3 The components used in FDC products should be chemically and physically compatible, unless 
formulation techniques have been demonstrated to overcome any such incompatibility.  
2.5 
Paediatric FDC formulations often differ from adult FDC products, and special consideration is needed 
concerning issues such as stability, palatability, dosing (frequency, mg/m2, mg/kg), toxicity (e.g. 
excipients and degradation products) and food requirements.  
2.6 
This policy document describes the principles of FDC product clinical evaluation in relation to the 
following four scenarios: 
2.6.1 Scenario 1 
A new FDC product developed as a generic bioequivalent to an existing FDC product. 
2.6.2 Scenario 2 
A new FDC product developed by combining active components that are already well studied and for 
which the simultaneous use of all the individual active components in a multi-component regimen 
has been well characterised as safe and effective. The dosage regimen of the components given 
individually in a multi- component regimen and the dosage regimen of the FDC product are the same. 
2.6.3 Scenario 3 
A new FDC product developed from individual components that have a well-characterized safety and 
efficacy profile on their own, but the efficacy and safety of their simultaneous use in a multi-
component regimen is not well established; or an FDC product developed using two or more well-
characterized individual components of an established multi-component regimen when the dosing 
regimen of the FDC product is novel. 
2.6.4 Scenario 4 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 9 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
A new FDC product developed by incorporating one or more new molecular entities. 
3 
NONCLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY 
3.1 
Microbiology 
3.1.1 
Scenarios 1 and 2 
Generally, no microbiologic evaluations are needed, unless the new FDC product is intended for a 
different geographic area with a different pathogen and/or resistance pattern. 
3.1.2 
Scenarios 3 and 4 
Microbiologic evaluations may be needed to determine the advantage of multi-component 
regimens or FDC products over individual active components against a given pathogen. Such 
microbiologic studies may be needed to motivate the selection of appropriate entities for combined 
use, and to evaluate the advantage of the multi component regimen over individual active 
components, when clinical trials of monotherapy are inappropriate or unethical. 
The following types of data may be important and should be obtained from studies performed to 
accepted standards: 
3.1.2.1 Characterization of microbiologic activity in vitro and in vivo against laboratory strains and 
clinical isolates of the targeted pathogens including those in the relevant geographic regions. 
3.1.2.1 Characterization of microbiologic activity in appropriate animal models of infection with the 
targeted pathogens. 
3.1.2.1 Characterization of the mechanism by which the active ingredients exhibit additive or 
synergistic microbiologic activity against the targeted pathogens. 
3.1.2.1 Investigation of potential antagonistic effects between the active components. 
3.1.2.1 Investigation of the potential for development of resistance of target pathogens in vitro and 
in vivo; and 
3.1.2.1 Where there are concerns about sub-therapeutic trough levels, investigation of microbiologic 
activity at anticipated human Cmin concentrations might be needed. In such cases, Cmin should 
be evaluated in human steady-state PK studies. 
3.2 
Non-clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology Scenarios  
3.2.1 
Scenarios 1 and 2 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 10 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology studies are generally not needed, as long as 
internationally acceptable excipients are used, and the impurities profile does not significantly 
deviate from the reference product.  
3.2.2 
Scenario 3  
3.2.2.1 For FDCs of two or more registered products, the need for non-clinical pharmacology or 
toxicology studies should be considered on a case-by-case basis. Generally, a bridging toxicity 
study should be considered if the combination is novel, or if the dose is higher than previously 
characterized and accepted. The design of the bridging study will depend on the individual 
components of the FDC. In such studies, consideration should be given to the dose ratios to 
be used in non-clinical studies versus the ones in clinical use and to the systemic exposure in 
animal versus man. 
3.2.2.2 Additional non-clinical studies may be requested if the proposed indication involves a longer 
treatment duration than is currently registered for one or more of the active components in 
the FDC. 
3.2.2.3 Additional non-clinical studies may be requested based on the outcome of the bridging study 
or if there is potential for interactions or overlapping toxicity. 
3.2.3 
Scenario 4  
3.2.3.1 A combination of one new molecular entity - for example, a new active component not 
previously registered for medicinal use in humans - with one or more registered active 
components requires a complete non-clinical evaluation (including genotoxicity and 
reproduction toxicity studies) of the new molecular entity. In addition, investigation of the 
toxicokinetics and a bridging toxicity study for the FDC may be needed. Alternatively, a 
complete non-clinical pharmacologic and toxicologic evaluation of the FDC (instead of the 
new molecular entity alone) may be considered as an option. 
3.2.3.2 If more than one new molecular entity is included in an FDC, a complete non-clinical 
evaluation (including genotoxicity and reproduction toxicity studies) of each new single entity 
and an appropriate bridging study for the FDC are required. The design of the bridging study 
depends on the individual entities of the FDC and the proposed conditions of use. 
3.2.3.3 Additional non-clinical studies may be needed based on the outcome of the bridging study 
or if there is potential for interactions or overlapping toxicity between the new and already 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 11 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
registered entities of the intended FDC. 
3.2.4 
All scenarios  
For all scenarios, additional non-clinical studies may be needed if new concerns are raised from non-
clinical or clinical information. 
4 
 CLINICAL SAFETY AND EFFICACY  
4.1 
Scenario 1  
A properly designed study should demonstrate bioequivalence (BE) between the FDC product and 
an adequate reference product in line with the latest Medicines Control Council guideline on 
Biostudies.  
4.2 
Scenario 2  
4.2.1 
A properly designed study should demonstrate bioequivalence between the FDC product 
and the individual active components given together.  
4.2.2 
The advantage of the combination may differ depending on the individual active components 
and the indication for use as described previously. The rationale for the simultaneous use of 
the individual active components in a multi-component regimen (and therefore in the 
proposed FDC product) must be justified. Each active component must be shown to 
contribute an advantage, when incorporated into the multi-component regimen or FDC 
product at the relevant doses. This may generally be demonstrated by means of a systematic 
review of the literature and/or other already existing data from clinical studies. 
4.3 
Scenario 3  
4.3.1 
The potential for favourable or unfavourable interactions between the components should 
have been investigated in appropriate PK and pharmacodynamic studies.  
4.3.2 
For a novel FDC (where a corresponding multi-component regimen has not already been 
established), the rationale for the simultaneous use of the individual active components 
generally needs to be justified by means of adequate comparative clinical studies. Such 
clinical studies should convincingly demonstrate the contribution to the efficacy and/or 
safety of each active component incorporated into the combination at the proposed doses.  
4.3.3 
When a novel FDC involves a change in the dose regimen of a previously characterised multi-
component regimen or FDC product, comparative clinical studies should be performed, 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 12 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
demonstrating at least equal efficacy and safety of the new dosing regimen compared to the 
previously used regimen.  
4.3.4 
In situations where comparative clinical trials are not feasible, for example when 
monotherapy is not acceptable, and aggregate of clinical and non-clinical data may be 
substituted. Such data may include:  
4.3.4.1 historical clinical data on the components used alone at comparable doses / at comparable 
exposure as in the proposed FDC; 
4.3.4.2 bridging pharmacokinetic data, where applicable; 
4.3.4.3 non-clinical pharmacology and/or toxicology data; and 
4.3.4.4 in vitro microbiologic data.  
4.3.5 
Clinical trials should demonstrate that the proposed FDC is statistically either non-inferior, 
equivalent, or superior compared to recognised treatment for the proposed indication. The 
reason for the choice of statistical hypothesis needs to be specified in the study protocol and 
the chosen option should be appropriate to the nature of the comparator and the scientific 
objective. For example, if a novel three-component FDC is compared to an existing FDC 
containing two of the active components, superiority should be shown. If an FDC is compared 
to a recognised treatment containing different active components, at least non-inferiority 
should be shown.  
4.3.6 
Combining the components of the proposed multi-component regimen into one product 
should not compromise the overall risk-benefit profile.  
4.3.7 
When there is potential for interaction or overlapping toxicity, preclinical toxicity studies, 
clinical safety studies and dose ranging studies may be needed before embarking on clinical 
efficacy studies. 
4.4 
Scenario 4 
A comprehensive clinical development program is needed. 
5 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CLINICAL STUDIES (SCENARIOS 3 AND 4)  
5.1 
In clinical safety and efficacy studies, comparators or comparator regimens should represent the 
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 13 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
recognised treatment for the indication in question. Because reliable performance of the comparator 
pharmaceutical product is crucial in determining the safety and efficacy of new FDC products or 
combination regimens, these comparators should be registered products, preferably innovator 
products or registered products whose safety, efficacy, and quality parameters have been well 
established and independently vetted by the Medicines Control Council (Refer Pharmaceutical and 
Analytical guideline - Reference products). 
5.1 
Unapproved or novel combinations should be avoided as comparators, as they may introduce new 
toxicities and complicate the evaluation of safety and efficacy.  
5.1 
Individual components that are being considered for inclusion in an FDC should have a well-
established risk-benefit profile in the target population when used according to the recommended 
dosing regimens. Consideration should be given to ethnic, environmental, co-morbid, and nutritional 
variations between populations, when scientifically appropriate.  
5.1 
The protocols should clearly state whether non-inferiority, equivalence or superiority is the objective 
of the studies. 
6 
SELECTION OF ENDPOINTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS (SCENARIOS 3 and 4) 
6.1 
Clinical and microbiological endpoints including treatment duration should be selected that are 
relevant for the indication. Accepted guidelines, where available, should be consulted. 
6.2 
The follow-up period in clinical trials should be appropriate to allow:  
6.2.1 
scientifically acceptable assessment of efficacy;  
6.2.2 
where applicable, an assessment of the risk of relapse after cessation of therapy; and  
6.2.3 
an adequate assessment of late-appearing adverse events. 
7 
REFERENCES 
The reference documents listed below are intended to provide additional information. However, it should be 
noted that documents identified do not represent a comprehensive list of all reference documents and may 
be further supplemented: 
7.1 “Note for Guidance on Repeated Dose Toxicity,” July, 2000. Committee for Proprietary Medicinal 
Products, www.emea.eu.int/pdfs/human/swp/104299en.pdf   
SAHPGL-CEM-PRE-02_v2 
Page 14 of 14
Guideline for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
6 February 2023 
 
 
7.2 
“Note for Guidance on Fixed-Dose Combination Medicinal Products,” April 1996, Committee for 
Proprietary. Medicinal Products/Efficacy Working Party/240/95. 
7.3 
“Note for Guidance for on the Clinical Development of Medicinal Products for Treatment of HIV 
Infection.” March, 2003, Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products, 
www.emea.eu.int/pdfs/human/ewp/063302en.pdf   
7.4 
“Points to Consider on Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics in the Development of 
Antibacterial Medicinal Products,” July, 2000. Committee for Proprietary Medicinal 
Products/Efficacy Working Party/2655/99. www.isap.org/1999/Uppsala/265599en.pdf  
7.5 
“Note for Guidance on Duration of Chronic Toxicity Testing in Animals,” Nov. 1999. International 
Conference on Harmonization. www.ich.org  
7.6 
“Dose-Response Information to Support Drug Registration,” March 1994. International Conference 
on Harmonization. www.ich.org   
7.7 
“Pharmacovigilance Planning, E2E,” Nov. 11, 2003. International Conference on Harmonization. 
www.ich.org   
7.8 
Guidelines for good clinical practice (GCP) for trials on pharmaceutical products", 1996, World 
Health Organization, Technical Report Series No. 850, 1995, Annex 3, 
www.who.int/medicines/library/par/ggcp/GCPGuidePharmatrials.pdf   
7.9 
Guidance for Industry, “E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance,” April 1996. International 
Conference on Harmonization. www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/959fnl.pdf  
7.10 Guidelines for registration of fixed-dose combination medicinal products, 2005, World Health 
Organization, Technical Report Series No. 929, Annex 5, 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_929_eng.pdf#page=103  
8 
VALIDITY 
This guideline is valid for a period of 5 years from the effective date of revision and replaces the old guideline 
number 2.31 for Fixed Dose Combination Products (FDC Products) for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. It 
will be reviewed on this timeframe or as and when required. 
 
